Still chair, but is Cheers.
Na. Marina. Marina. Okay. No,
my ha ma, welcome.
Uh, qua Ben. Good to see you again. Uh, qua Kelly?
Yes. Kelly? Yes. Uh, KDA? Uh, no. My ha ma mahar.
Um, welcome to the Mafi Select Committee.
It's been some, a long time since we've seen each other, uh,
whole six months, I believe.
But, uh, welcome back
and, um, you've got members here from across Parliament, uh,
uh, to, um, be with you today.
Um, we're looking forward to continuing the,
that we started six months ago.
Um, and, uh, uh, Ben will give you a chance to,
um, have some opening remarks.
The opening remarks are about three minutes.
We'll have a bit of leeway, but, um, uh,
please keep it short
'cause we're, I think the team is really keen
to just have a really good quarter all with you, uh, about
how Tu is doing.
We are here to discuss the annual review period
ending June this year.
So, um, again, no, my hi or my welcome
and, um, we'll give it over to you, uh, now.
Okay.
Lebanon. Um,
well, I've been the chair for about six months now,
and, uh, it has been a learning curve.
Um, I would say the key issues I see is that, uh,
originally the, um, the,
the document that guides the investments
that typically Tony can make at the moment, uh,
restricts the investments to Northland
and, um, has at the heart of it, the belief
that the assets should be made available at a certain point
for distribution to
kapu should there be a treaty settlement.
I personally think that, that our brief should be widened
and that, um, the key people should have been
to take the $150 million
and turn it into 300 million as soon as possible.
Uh, and I say that
because, uh, land in Northland is
extremely cheap when compared to the rest of the country.
And given that if, uh, follows the, um,
the Copa that as land was taken, so it should be returned.
If you have $300 million or 400
or 500 million, you can buy considerable lead.
And, uh, if we are restricted to having to buy specific,
um, uh, investments in different areas,
and I particularly think about earlier, the, the, um,
board has had to look at
how does it get a distribution in the, and,
and right across the board.
But the number of investments that you would ordinarily want
to purchase is quite limited.
So, um, an example too at the moment is
have, uh, put out a to see what Iwi would like
to co-invest, and
that's something I think I would be really
interested in pursuing.
Um, and also we've had discussions with, uh, Nui
that are at a pretty basic level.
Um, uh, and a really good opportunity would be the
possibility of, um, some type of joint investment
and leading a consortium to do the, to road.
Uh, and probably in our current, um, configuration
that would be quite difficult.
So it's pretty much my position on things.
Um, and, you know, if,
if there was a treaty settlement at some stage, um, the,
the decision could be made at that time as to whether the
investments were kept together in one block
or they were distributed to Ty
or, uh, type arrangements.
Mm-Hmm. Going forward,
Kia Ben, that was being on three minutes.
So, um, look,
we'll just throw it out into begin the conversations.
So, um, uh, got questions from, uh, Hua Linden,
Um, and recognizing our shared in this space,
but also the focus
of our discussions today being nu hearing your frustration
around the remit of Nu right now.
Um, is it your position that we need
to be reinvestigating the whole purpose
and the ability for the group to exercise at, at scale
and outside of our tribal boundaries, uh, in order to, uh,
really, uh, increase the revenue intended for, uh, a solid
commercial settlement?
Um, so that's one question,
but then also knowing where investments
to date have been, uh, targeted.
Um, you can see that there's a limited pool
of scope within the north.
Um, and, uh, what, what is the strategy
for the north right now?
Ha Have you landed on a strategy
and investment strategy for the north?
For what we have in what, what does that look like?
Uh, previous boards,
I've been on the board since pre-established of the board.
Um, we have struggled to, um,
find commercial investments in particular in,
um, we have made one investment in the, which,
uh, we stand by.
It's actually benchmarked against all the other investments,
is achieving a satisfactory return.
Um, so the restrictions on it as per Ben's opening remarks,
uh, limit, um,
what we would call strategic investments.
There are strategic investments that we can't discuss
that we would like to make, uh, that would see
the fund firmly established as a commercial investment fund.
So I think it, it's a limitation one of imaginations,
but also of scope.
I mean, our letter of our expectations,
and that is to the letter of the law limits us
to exactly that investing in the land-based investments.
Um, we've had discussions with our shareholding minister
and that about that, but their discussions only
we would like an explicit change to
that level of expectation.
Um, so Would like
to Yeah.
Uh, sure. Um, all, all
that being said, um, so I agree
commercially we will get a better return if those
restrictions are lifted
and we can invest in a, in our,
I guess a more purely commercial focus.
But given what we've had to work with so far, you know,
we are quietly pleased with what we've achieved.
Um, so, um,
and you know, we, they have also modestly proud of,
of returns that we've been able to make so far.
Um, uh, and, um,
but yeah, uh, being, being opened up
to being more, more commercial will give us more
opportunities to grow the value of the fund, uh,
that would be, uh, advantageous.
Maybe I can ask a supple on that.
Um, what's the missed opportunity for return
by those restrictions?
So how much is your fund not growing by dollar terms
or percentage terms because of these restrictions?
Uh, I think that, to be honest, that would be hard to say
after run three years.
Yeah. Um, yeah, I, I would like
to put a number on that itself.
No, so thank you.
Um, I guess probably what, what we've seen,
what the restriction has meant is that we've invested, um,
our fund more slowly than, than what we would've liked.
That's, that's probably the most direct outcome, uh,
because, um, making,
making good sound investments takes time from a
due diligence point of view.
And, um, you know, we are going purposeful purposefully,
but carefully and, uh, and landing those fields.
Um, uh, another primary, uh, Uh,
It's a supplementary on that thinking
of the Northland context that they're operating in.
So, um, you know, you didn't meet your targets in terms
of the ability to invest more,
but also, um, the understanding is, is that
what you're doing in the north ultimately would go back
to the local hapu.
So of course, you know, let's talk kiwi fruit mm-Hmm.
Um, mid north. Um,
and yet that's a wide, it could be quite challenging if,
um, it's all sitting in one tribe,
the commercial settlement.
And then how do the tribes as they enter through the, um,
settlement or even be able to access that asset back
to have a full administration
or, um, what would that dividend look like?
So the challenge is quite difficult when we think about
where the hubs of commercial investment are
for T Toro without the release to go into.
Sounds like a question for Yeah, absolutely.
Um, supplementary, uh, Up as well,
Um, just going back to the, the opportunities
that you discussed with, um,
and potentially the, um, the roading project,
but what are the restrictions when it comes to investing in,
uh, opportunities in TAMA
and makoto within your current agreement, if any?
We are technically restricted to,
I think a percentage of percentage of around 20%.
Outside of, well outside, not specifically outside of the,
but other investments
that are not particularly land-based investments.
We have, for example, we have shares in Zespri
and that technically is, uh, um, tu in.
Mm, good one. Um,
and, uh, I think also, I think to take another sector,
as per your previous question, uh, um,
if you look at property, for example, the cost
of the missed opportunity basically is
the story.
I mean, it is a natural investment in the sense
of it's a one, it's a huge missed opportunity,
for example, in
I think our beauty outside would be exceptional in,
and it works with our current.
Just remind me, uh, the percentage of that resided in ko,
Do you know what last?
It's over 50% anyway. Wow.
But the, to previous census,
so I dunno about the current census.
And what would be the next steps of pursuing
that opportunity for you?
Well, conversation with Lisa last,
Um, Have you had those conversations to date?
I've initiated, I've had conversations with, um,
but we haven't taken it to, um, investing what
we haven't taken it to investigating, um,
what the opportunity is.
It's only really been in the last few weeks
Mm-Hmm. Nothing
with the minister at this stage, no.
Okay. When we have talked to him about that, um, like
with the road, he was king, so,
and, uh, I don't know how he'll be with,
but it's, uh,
exceptional circumstances. Yeah.
The words in our letter are rare
and exceptional at this point.
That's the written instructions.
Uh, thank you. Uh, David cle,
Just so that following on,
and, um, Jo, um, it's, it's,
you've had some significant engagement with, uh,
upper in the, and congratulations on that.
You've far exceeded your, uh, your, your goal itself.
But is this one of the lines of questioning
that you've got all the engagement that you've had with, uh,
with, with, and,
and how do they feel, feel about the fact that
of them potentially investing elsewhere?
Not, not likely is it,
Um, you know, there's
110 plus Hapu Mm-Hmm.
Um, all have a view.
Um, there is no consensus about whether
or not to invest here
and there, there is a, there is a consensus in kaki,
for example, of Hapu members who live in Tamaki that yes,
they would like to see investment in Target.
So that's as far as it goes.
But all of our engagement with Hapu are on the basis of
if our commercial cons, commercial interests
and our investments interests align with your interests,
then we talk Turkey.
But beyond that, it is purely an engagement, um,
and exercise them in, in engaging
as we do, as part of what we want.
So we're not driven by what their con yes, we're driven by
what their concerns are,
but those concerns must align with our investment policy,
our investment strategy, and where they have aligned.
That's great. Yep.
Greg, Ben, um, supplementary on this,
and then going back to your opening remarks about, um,
just towards the end of your, of your, um,
your three minutes where you talked about, uh, you said
that the current structure was
already used, this isn't fair.
What would it look like for you if you were sitting in,
in front of a whiteboard, um, and, and,
and basically saying, okay, um, let's say
that a settlement's gonna take somewhere
between five and 10 years.
Who knows, um, uh, with that, um, what is it that, that,
that, that, that for you would be the key thing to achieve?
How would that, that sort of horizon in line
and what would be the structure to deliver that?
I would like to see us able to take advantage
of all the best investments that are in the marketplace
at this time, provided they fit within ethical boundaries.
Yeah. And to do partnerships with
whoever we could do them with.
And, and at the,
because at a certain point, you, you might decide
with the cabby fruit, um, orchards to divest those,
but it's the total value of the fund
that I'd be more interested in.
Right. And when you get to the settlement 0.1 day,
then people can make that decision at that time period.
Yeah. And there is like this thing about you can't,
this morning, I was, last night we were talking, you know,
nearly all the shops in Kaiwei are owned by Indians,
but no one gets upset about their Indians other than the
fact they're Indian, but that they can buy what they want.
But if typical Tony is to buy in a certain area
that makes people nervous, it's kind strange to me.
Sure. You know, when, when in reality, re
or I'm not joking, you know, Chinese companies can come
and buy Yeah.
5,000 hectares, but we, I shouldn't use Chinese,
but foreign, uh, interests can do that.
But if t's gonna buy a solar, uh, solar farm in a, um,
particular area, then you've gotta go through a whole lot
of extra, uh, consultation.
Yeah. I might just, um, go, who?
Hannah Lyon and Shannon. Yeah.
A supplement of, um, member McLeod's parti
around Hapu engagement.
And, um, also noting, um,
that it only if ha's aspirations align with your remit
that Hapu are considered in this space.
I guess that's some of our fundamental issues, a, is that,
um, the, the fund is not accountable to the people
that are meant to be the beneficiaries.
It's accountable to Crown ministers.
And so there is that nervousness whereby, um, the drivers
are not coming from the voice of the people or,
and even that we don't have capacity
or capability to, um, understand, um, the commercial space
because wouldn't it be great to own Kohi
or Moua, you know, in terms of the, the town center, um,
and then look to build, um, from that space.
Um, that's just me putting that out there.
But, um, have to get through five papo on that
and then to go with that.
Um, and luckily we're all from Kaiko here, so
that's good, uh, can do that.
But, um, but yeah, the, the, the push
and pull I guess is maybe, um,
because while you've been having a lot of engagements
with Hapu, um, across the, um, it's also
how to engage meaningfully to,
to have the commercial conversation.
Um, maybe that's a capacity thing
that we could do in the hapu space in readiness
for receiving an asset back even, um, that,
that could be cool in terms of, uh,
an investment opportunity for us to be ready, um,
for these, um, discussions.
Many of us in UA Maori are just getting in there now,
so even that's a limitation.
But in the hapu land we have, um, you know,
we don't have much structure, so I'm just wanting to fill
that out in terms of the hapu engagement,
but also Hapu capability, um,
to prepare commercially.
Um, that goes, your point goes precisely to
the reason why we, uh, revised our disbursement policy.
Uh, 60% of the disbursements, uh, fund this year,
our disbursement round opened a couple of weeks ago,
is targeted precisely what you're talking about, about, um,
building capacity amongst now hoodie
and hapu, uh, specifically.
So for example, uh, so they can acquire skills
training or mentoring
or development to be able to underscore
or to participate post settlement entities,
but to get ready for post settlement Now,
Shannon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, I've been really concerned, like many about the, uh,
impacts of policy decisions from this government on Maori,
one of those in particular around, um, both cuts
and changes within, and I know
that you've had a very close working relationship
with TA in your, in your time.
I wondered if you could talk us through the in detail, um,
I guess the value add
that TE 50 played over the past, over this period.
Um, the current situation for you
and what implications, if any, might impact on, um,
the certainty, uh, for your, for your organization
and the role that you played.
Um,
Kelly, Hello Kelly
and, and, um, slow down on your acting role.
Sure. Thank you. Kelly Kia. What a great question.
Having just come from Tata fatigue, uh,
and obviously, uh, know the, uh, benefits
of having a agency
that is focused on Maori crown relationship.
Um, and so obviously, uh,
ti helped create to, uh, if we are successful,
they will be successful, right?
Because they will have the opportunity to provide
a commercially sound asset base
that they've never had before.
Mm. So in terms of, uh,
Tata's, uh, benefit across the system, there's
no other agency who has had the traction, uh,
across the system, whether it is, uh, in policy
design or whether it is, uh, in relationships
or whether it is in, uh, risk management, um,
what that looks like, uh, in the future.
So post the changes, uh, that's yet to be seen.
Are you able to plan for any of those changes currently?
What's been communicated to Puna?
Uh, so we are lucky to, Puni will stay with, uh,
uh, so those relationships will, uh,
still be there. Yeah.
Could I, um, supplement you from, um, ha
Thank you, Mr.
I just wanted to stop on, um, Shannon's partai around.
Um, if I was to put, uh, NUS entity and,
and articulate that into my own electorate,
you'd be like the pre TGH, um, before the settlement.
Yeah. Um, so just with,
just establishing, um, have you had the opportunity
to have conversation with, uh,
and what that relationship will look like moving forward?
Um, if that one day will ever come for, for settlement,
Uh, not a specific conversation with around, uh, us,
uh, as I said, our relationship will remain
with the remaining chat.
Gotcha. Uh, and so,
but obviously with the post settlement, uh, function moving
to there will become a time where
that conversation will be really important.
Just, um,
and then suffering on my question around being that
pre post settlement entity.
Have you, is there a relationship knowing
that we've been coming up to our 30 years being settled,
Um, That relationship
with other post settlement entities and the pros
and cons of kind of their timeline, um, is
that relationship there?
Uh, so we have various conversations.
Uh, there's a lot to learn Yeah. From, uh, PSGs. Yeah.
Uh, in terms of, uh, what they looked for, uh,
the challenges that they had to overcome.
I mean, the first five years in the post settlement world
is, uh, really trying as you kind of move from pre to post
and it's a different way of thinking
and how do you truncate that five year period.
So yes. And still more to come. Cool.
Um, um,
we've got a su another supplementary from Brett
Fleming voices.
Well done, well done. Tui, you tell.
Okay. Um, Ika, do you, um, comment before around ua?
I was, this is a question I had been keen to ask is,
is if the con concept of, of what Ben's saying is
that the primary aim of the fund, um, I ideally, um,
should be to grow it, then Tuku seems to, um,
well potentially be at odds with that.
Um, because every dollar
that's given away is not a dollar that's actually growing.
However, I really appreciated your, um, um, zeroing in on
what the purpose of those grants are in the report.
That didn't appear to be though what of, of
where they've been spent in the last 12 months.
They projects that they were given
to seemed more like wana audit kind of funds.
You speak to, just, just to be case,
so UA is actually a profit on investment.
So it isn't from the principal fund. Yes.
So we restricted this year at, um, uh,
taking only 9% Yeah.
Of that by minister's wish. Yes. Um, that we do that.
So UA is that 9%. Yeah. So it's not out of the P tier.
Yeah, no, I'm just mean, but, but it's,
but by, by giving it away, you're not, you're not building
that, that's money that's not going
to then compound and build up the farm,
Potentially. But
Your question, Greg, was about what, what we are
distributing the money for as against
what you observed in the last
report. Was that your question, Greg?
Yeah, that is, that's the second part.
And then the first part is a more general question around
how does, how does distributing any of the fund fit
with the, with, with Ben's long term purpose?
Yeah. I, I think, um, it, it's, uh, it,
it's a small part of our returns.
And as you can see from the growth of the fund, it's not,
you know, certainly not damaging the fund.
We, um,
and the other side of it is that that's what we run, that's
what we were asked to do, uh,
from the establishment of the fund.
And then we have this dual purpose
of growing a commercial entity
and also building relationships with, uh, with Hapu.
Right.
I think it comes back to the question
or the statement that who Hana had around, uh, having
to also work to build the capability.
And so the AWA fund
and those disbursements help to invest that
and that, so that when
in the future a commercial base is provided, yeah.
There is some capacity there to do that.
And in terms of your second point, yeah, so that's the added
focus for our third round that is currently live. Gotcha.
Thank you. Up on that, please.
Um, Supplementary
And then I'll do my primary.
I only wanna ask about TFA
because, um, previously it was
quite broad and it was lovely.
Yes, yes.
So now we are getting into some targeted funding, right?
'cause you know, there's only so many festivals in kabaka
performances that the fund should be supporting.
Um, it's just reading your brief in terms
of even accountability tightening up
on the fund and its purpose.
I'd like to congratulate you.
'cause as a skeptical, I've sat there and watched it go out
and thought at what stage are we gonna focus on building
capacity and capability, but also that the fund is targeted
to haper capacity and capability.
So thank you. It's, it's looking great for this next round.
Um, David MacClean,
Well, mine is on the same, uh, uh, on, on as well.
And it's related to the return on investment.
And, uh, it's, uh, articulated here that, uh, over the life
of it, it's, it's, uh, approximately, uh, 2%, um, on the,
um, on its, uh, on its return there, you've got a goal, uh,
well, there's a different goal in the, uh,
annual report in question here to
what is the statement of intent.
Now you've added the, uh, 200 basis points
above the CPI, which is great.
Uh, but with ua as in, you've got this, uh, uneasy tension
with regards to inflation proofing the investment over time,
which clearly is potentially a goal from
what I read with what you've got there.
Uh, but the UA is the, is the, the hand break on
that as well.
But I haven't been able to find here how you settle,
settle on the amount of the profits while being dispersed,
uh, versus what tain to continue to grow, uh, the equity
of the, uh, of the fund itself.
Could you talk to that a little bit?
That's by agreement At the
Year by year.
So are you looking at the, at a percentage of, um,
e how are you coming to a figure, uh, each year regards?
Originally when we were established, it was up
to a maximum of 20%
Of our returns. Yeah.
Of, of our profit. Mm-Hmm. Correct.
So it, that has always been the cap.
Um, and then I think that's slimmed down to that 10%
On less than 10 level Now.
Less than 10% in the current year.
Right. Because I do note that your targeted return
is prior to disbursements,
Correct. That's
Right. So, um,
obviously China inflation proof is after disbursements.
Um, and that's, uh, that's your challenge, uh, that you have
with regards to those two tensions.
Mm-Hmm. Great.
Um, looking around my primary, yes, huga,
Um, it's in relation to investment priorities
and where we've gone thus far
with the 12 investments to date.
So knowing we've got a limitation to todo,
we've got a spread across primary industries, um,
and a bit of commercial buildings and stuff.
So, um, thinking about some of, um, others who
are working in the space already in TA Toro,
and it's exciting to see a solar development, you know,
that we are dipping our toes in that space.
Um, are there any other discussions that might be happening
with others in the energy space
or, um, even with, um, carbon farming being a COPA
that you're investigating, there might be opportunities
for co-investment with others
Yes. To all those things.
We've got talk about that,
Asking for a friend.
Tom, do you wanna talk about the direction?
Yeah, there's a number of conversations.
Uh, There's a number of conversations going on at the
moment in that space, particularly that the energy
and infrastructure sector.
There's quite a lot of momentum up there
in Northland in that space.
So we're just particip in all the conversations we can
to see what's available.
That's great. That makes sense.
I guess the only thing I'd add to
that is we've got a much, much more intentional overlay
around strategic investments around, you know, property,
energy infrastructure, sector by sector, um,
with a major emphasis on energy
and property and infrastructure
And people and capability too,
I guess when we're going into these different sectors
Yeah. Within our restrictions.
Mm-Hmm. Um, supplementary,
Yes, if I can. Um,
so these all investments does it, you know,
everything has risk about it.
Um, could we talk a little bit about your risk management
process, uh, prior to going into, uh,
committing to an investment?
Um, you, you are capturing of that process
because at the end of the day, there's a lot
of accountability required from your,
your many up, et cetera.
So perhaps talk about risk management for the group.
Do you want to come back? Well, I
Was gonna say, I mean, just if we,
if we talk about it at a framework level,
we do have a risk management policy
and framework that we, that sits organizationally wide.
We then have a specific, um, investment, uh,
risk management overlay as well.
So investment policy statement, which sets out a number
of parameters, whether that's sector
limits or, or risk limits.
Uh, so that's the first stage of that.
And then on a deal basis, we write
through a pretty thorough diligence process,
including all the standard reviews you'd expect,
legals and all that sort of thing.
So pretty thorough process
before the board then approves
the, the allocation of capital.
And can you give, provide an example of the threshold
where an investment risk is actually
exceeding your appetite?
Like how are you assessing what's in the portfolio
and what's potentially not appropriate?
Yeah, it's a tricky one.
'cause it's very case by case process.
Um, and it's probably something
that's developed just over time.
Naturally, as we've put different opportunities in front
of the board to really understand with a lens
to our investments, you kind
of have a bit of a flaw on your risk.
We are not doing the venture capital type space.
We're not playing in that sector.
So we're not, we're not participating in the really high
risk end of, of the investment universe. Mm-Hmm.
Probably I should, yeah, I could just add an overview of
that is that, um, we, we are proven
to be risk averse I guess
because of the feedback we get, uh,
from our area when we turn deals down.
So we are regarded as, um,
more thorough than perhaps other investors in
that area would be even, um,
other public entity guests. Very,
Yeah. We, we do
a very thorough due diligence process
as you would expect, um, that's appropriate for our role.
Um, and to supplement the process, Tom talks about,
we have an investment subcommittee of the board.
So at an early stage, all of our investments will come to
that subcommittee effectively as an initial gate.
'cause we are quite a small organization
and you can't look at every investment in detail.
So we have to gate those investments quite early on.
And they're gated in terms of compliance
with our investment policy, um, potential return,
but then some of those other risk factors about, um,
you know, the community impact and with perceptions. So.
And is this tested in your engagement with, uh, nap
with your engagement around the place?
Or is it something that's your job to do that?
That's what you do, you don't sort of press it?
Well, engagement per se is a risk management
exercise. So in terms of,
Especially nap Yeah.
Tested in terms of best practice, I think we, we have, I,
as you would imagine and expect, uh, with now we, we've got,
um, we have a public responsibility in terms
of protection of the brand.
Um, and that puts upon us, I guess another layer
of opportunity,
but also puts another layer
around responsibility in terms of engagement.
Yes. It's with pu it's with now as well.
Some PU think that, um,
is a watering down
of their eventual prospect at a treaty settlement.
Mm-Hmm. And there is some suspicion from people
because you gotta think about Pui in terms of those
who live at home and they participate in tribal life.
And then the greater majority who live in Auckland
or are not participating.
So like if you, I, I live most of the time up there
and I go to nearly all of the Hui.
And, um, it varies from can you buy our mountain bag for us,
uh, to, uh, you guys are sellouts.
So, you know, you get the full spectrum to, to that,
that particular issue.
Mm-Hmm. And then there are other people who, um,
'cause when Han is talking about the, um, building, uh,
capacity and capability, there's plenty of who have, uh,
those skills that are needed.
They just sometimes are not participating in, uh, the,
the tribal, um, the tribal life.
Yeah. At this time.
Got a few subs here. So first Rema in Hua and
David at Maria team.
Thank you. Um, so just following from that, I'm curious, um,
if you don't mind when you say
that there's been about 70 engagements
and pu um, can you give us a picture of what some
of those engagements, I understand, you know, meetings
and everything, but what other things
that might not be the usual understanding
of an engagement has taken place and,
and how do you measure what an engagement looks like to come
to that figure of 70?
The majority of engagement takes place really at the deal
level or pre-deal level.
Mm-Hmm. And then if it's escalated, for example, one
of the engagements where the board
came into the engagement was when other matters
were raised in the context of the proposed deal.
So, and so it can, it can go from they're not,
and atypically, they're not one off engagements.
So an engagement can be a series of
small one-on-one team meetings right through
to a full team meeting right through
to a full team plus board meeting.
So those 17 engagements of multiple
engagements with 17 identified approval entities.
Okay. So it's more with the identified entities, robust
and they're very robust discussions.
And later on we have a primary. Okay. Yes.
We'll come back to, uh, Hua, Lyndon. Oh yes.
Thank supplementary.
Um, wanting to query in terms of, so, um,
in those engagements you have the who, um,
and we've heard, you know, uh, some hapu are as simple
as mowing a back and others might have, um, ideas
or aspirations on a farm
or something that's come up on the market.
Um, do you think that puu, um, in terms of the UA space,
could even consider something of a, in the cultural nature,
um, of give in the future?
Um, and that's once we get more, um, revenue in the door,
I guess, uh,
because why wait, um, for
the treaty settlement when there can be some easy ones now
that can, um, demonstrate that the fund, um, can do some,
some small good, um,
and different, I I do think of mountains, you know, um,
they're big and shiny for us
and we've lost them a long time ago.
Um, but when people have lost so much, um,
getting your ancestral mountain
back makes such a difference.
Or is it that pu becomes a gateway for
that negotiation space to see the retrieval?
I'm just trying to find a way with which we,
we can still get some cultural gains whilst all managing,
um, the growth of a commercial asset. Um, for the
Ha. Yes. And
the return
of manga should really be TA's role.
And there's the hu today for Yeah,
that's good practice, which is underway.
And in my prior life I negotiated for
and also parking it back for our people.
So those things should happen anyway.
They shouldn't have to be loaded onto, um,
I guess it's been a little bit of my angst as well, is
that I can't help
but feel that to a certain degree t was seen
by some people as being able
to augment the crown's obligation, have to, um,
deal with those issues.
All the mo all the motor should come back Mm-Hmm.
But we shouldn't have to buy it.
'cause that that doesn't make sense.
And so to tos on that,
absolutely we should not be purchasing our own moga back
and the crown should be doing the right thing.
Um, but with the fragmentation of ti um,
and the slow wheels of justice, they turn, um, you know,
what, what is, what is the mechanism?
And so this is thinking of your breadth of experience
'cause you've got quite a diverse table.
Um, what, what advice would you give now seeing the nature
and the state of where we are at?
Some of the small ones that we've had, acknowledging a few.
Um, but, uh, for, for us as tribes, um,
how to even get some lift, lift off with some
of these things, knowing that we've got a fragmentation
of a, of a system that, that was so slow moving.
We're lucky to get a mountain back every five years.
So, um, yeah. Thoughts on that?
Well, augmenting the funding would be a sure way to
accelerate progress so that we can have greater impact,
particularly around some
of the bigger strategic investments.
So I guess clear message from the board
is really around yeah.
Augmenting the fund
and let us get on with the job that would worth
that we have a remit to do.
Mm-Hmm. I think we've done well
And extend your breadth of Reit. Yeah. Um,
Final question from Greg
Fleming, just around the augmenting of the fund.
What are the current restrictions around borrowing
and what would you like to see him change
To? We can't
at
All. Can't borrow,
Can't take on.
And what would your recommendation be?
Um, in, in terms of changing it?
We would like to, Within what sort of parameters
Probably should be Developed and discussed? Yeah,
I mean, we wouldn't, you know, we, being a conservative,
you know, long term intergenerational fund,
we wouldn't wanna take on the sort of levels of debt
that you, I guess other investors would take on.
But a modest, you know, capability to, to do, uh,
debt equity deals would,
would certainly enhance our ability to do deals.
I mean, you wouldn't expect us
to be a highly levered fund.
That would not be our role.
But where we have partnerships already in place
with other organizations, being able to our investment,
you know, and join together with others
and leverage something for a really impactful investment
would make sense with the appropriate risk appetite. Yeah,
Excellent. Somebody with far
deeper pockets,
but aligned with the same purpose.
Yeah. Well, thank you very much, uh, Ben, uh, Sarah,
Rebecca, Tom, Michael Kelly,
and I don't know if I've left anybody else.
Is it Ben? Yep.
Thank you very much for your, um, uh,
coming before us today.
I think you've given us some really clear direction
around your future Copa, so I really do hope that, um,
those conversations go well with the minister.
And I just wanna say thank you on behalf of the committee.
Flat, white, long blacks, long black is, um,
suit black.
Welcome. So nice.
Oh yeah. Whatever.
Koto. No, my, uh, my Dave, welcome to you and your team.
Grace. Um, Paula, good to see you again.
Yes, ENA. Ena. Good to see you. Uh, welcome back.
See your team, Steven. I see you there, KDA.
Um, look, uh, thank you for coming before us today
and, um, welcome back.
We are here to talk about the annual review ending
30th of June this year.
Um, but most importantly, we are here
to continue the quarter with you about TPK and the,
and the work you guys are doing.
Um, so you, um, have no doubt got the structured agenda.
Um, that's kind of broadly the,
the agenda that we'll follow.
Mm-Hmm. Um, you kind
of got a roughly six minute introduction, Dave.
Um, there's a bit of leeway there, so take your time.
But we, we are really just keen to continue the, that we've,
um, started with you, uh,
and continued over the last few months.
So, uh, no Maha, I welcome to you and your team
and over to you today.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Um, just to add to the introductions, you know,
everybody at the front, but just in terms
of their functions, Taina is in charge of strategy or policy
and grace, the regions, we have 17 offices in the regents
behind me, I have Steven, you did mention Steven,
he is the deputy secretary for governance
and we have Anou Matthews here as well, the Deputy Secretary
for organizational support.
The other staff here are senior leaders across the
organizational, both at a regional
and a head office level that can talk to specifics.
Given that we have quite a long period of time,
um, for this hearing.
So if I just start off with our strategic direction, um,
our strategy, and that's what the,
Sorry, um, That, that's what the, uh,
Yeah, my apologies. Yeah. Continue on.
Oh yeah. That, that's what the, um,
annual report is based on the last past year
of this strategy that was developed in 2020.
And the strategy goes out to 2024.
And it has provided us with clarity in terms of our vision,
our purpose, our role, and our strategic priorities.
This is the last year of the strategy.
So it has lasted four years.
Um, it is the only strategy in, um,
the ministry's history that has lasted four years.
The Maori development portfolio is quite fluid,
but this has last us four years,
but we are stepping into a new strategy
and that's appropriate given the
next four years ahead of us.
So what have we learned over the last four years?
Well, the first point, and some of these you will have heard
before, but I do wanna reemphasize them.
The first point is that the public service does not
deliver for all Maori.
In particular, the top down processes
that are individually focused has limitations,
particularly given that Maori society.
Within Maori society.
The primary unit is Secondly,
a more effective delivery approach for the Maori community
is whanau centered, locally led
and government enabled.
That is what we have learned.
Thirdly, there are other actors in the community
that can deliver, but they are from the community
and they are not of the public service.
And finally, a deliberate policy approach is
required for Maori issues.
And in that regard, we have developed
as a public policy approach.
So we are to next, as I said, we're in the progress of, uh,
we're in the, in the process of transitioning
to our next strategy for the next four years.
The foundational element of that strategy are
the cabinet decisions that were taken by this cabinet
to position to punty for strategic influence.
These decisions require a further change process
that will be implemented by both US and TA
and completed by the 24th of February.
And in particular at a high level to Punty, is charged
to promote increases in the levels
of Maori achievement in the education, training, health
and economic resource development to monitor
and liaise with departments
to ensure the services they provide to
and for Maori, uh, adequate
advise the government
and the public service on distinct rights, interests
and responsibilities of iwi, hapu
and Maori lead post settlement relationships with
PSGs and monitor the crown's implementation
of treaty settlement commitments
and support the investment into whanau centered, locally led
and government enabled interventions.
I've assessed that change process as a realignment and,
and accelerated growth focused on
doing more of what we currently do, um, in some areas
dialing down what we have been doing in some areas,
but also taking on the new functions from charter fatigue.
My intention is to approach this in two stages.
The first stage will be embedding the change process
to achieve that realignment
and accelerated growth, um, situation.
And that will run from now until the 24th of February.
The second stage will be concurrently,
we are developing our strategy
for the future based on those cabinet decisions
and where the government is taking us.
And that will run for four years after the 24th of February.
That's my intro.
Um, and I guess, um, if you have any questions, um,
I'm open to questions, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
KDA. Thank you.
Um, so we will probably probably follow this, um,
agenda and, and we've got part one
and part two around organizational overview
and performance reporting might just take those together
'cause they're kind of overlap.
Um, so members do, who wants to start us off with questions?
I I might start us off there Dave.
Um, so the quarter we've continued with the TPK, um, a lot
of it has been around performance reporting
and our desire to get a better understanding of,
um, TP K's, um, uh,
role in improving Maori outcomes and how TPK is doing that.
Um, in the audit, there were some concerns around,
you know, improving the performance framework for TPK.
And I know you guys are changing
and there's some changes that TPK is going through,
but do you want to talk us through,
since the last appearance
before the select committee, what has TPK um,
done to try
and evolve the discussion around, um, performance reporting
for Maori outcomes?
Sure. What I, what I would say in terms of the audit,
which is very good, very good
and good just to reiterate
what the audit committee has told you and,
and good being the, um, the performance reporting
that you're talking about.
And I think, uh, from memory, um, focusing on,
um, more medium to short term,
There are very few agencies
that get anything better than good in the public service.
And I've explained to you why that is
before we cannot, cannot prove attribution
in the public service beyond level two
is a level two improving attribution in terms of our
programs, um, particularly far water,
but across the public service there is an issue with pro uh,
um, with proving attribution.
That'd be the first point I'd make.
And as I said to you in the last, um, we had
identifying what's not, not working is easy.
Identifying what works is the key.
And so, um, that's quite important to note
and provide solutions because the monitoring function and,
and clearly we are dialing up our monitoring functions
and we talk about that in more detail
that will only take you so far.
But for the last 40 years, we have been fairly Maori
and I don't think that is the best place to,
to put our opinion is on.
Um, sorry, did you
Repeat the last 40 years?
Yeah, the 40 years. You know, when I referred to Wild,
you know, in John, he saw then what we are seeing now.
Mm-Hmm. Um, so, so it's really important
to identify solutions
and sometimes in the last 40 years that has been lost,
it's been tried, but it has been lost
because we continue to adhere to a top down,
individually focused system
that our whole democracy is based off on the outcomes.
We are talking about intergenerational situations here
that really does, you know, from, from my perspective,
that doesn't allow for short term, medium term,
um, outcomes to be developed.
We should be looking, um, at the, um, horizon
and that's what we are trying to do and change the system.
So that's just an, an overview
and I'll just hand over to Steven to talk about
The Outcome in general.
Got it. Thanks Dave. And I think Mr.
Chairman, um, to your question and,
and to, to follow on from Dave's quarter role there,
I think it, it is necessary to, um, reflect
that what pun corty is trying
to do is about long-term goals.
Um, and that our strategic contentions reflect that.
Now, I, um, appreciate
that our friends at Audit New Zealand have spoken about
short two medium term goals
and specifically also, uh, measures which, um,
over which 20 has more control.
That was another part of the, um, recommendation along
with also reviewing departmental
and non-departmental, uh, appropriation measures come to
that later point in a moment.
As Dave said, necessarily, these are long term.
And I think the other part
to emphasize there is necessarily given the scale
of 20 corki, uh, a lot of
what we are measuring in those long term
and goals, uh, need to occur
through other agencies as well.
We alone as a department can't move the whole system,
which then comes back to, uh, Maori Development Act 9, 9 1
and our specific responsibilities in their,
so that's, that's the context in which, um,
our response to that question would sit.
Um, and I think also
then coming to the second limb of what the, um,
board at NZ said also true that, um,
when we look at departmental
and non-departmental appropriation measure,
that is something that we would review annually as part of
the appropriation process anyway.
Um, Tarina, I don't necessarily want to hand
to you straight away unless you want to pick up,
but I think, um,
you've probably got some reflections on the, um,
performance measures themselves
and where we might be going with those. Yeah.
Um, Sophie, think about the per long term
performance measures.
One of them, um, just looking over my notes now, is, um,
number of Maori in owning their own home.
And that's not something that we can fix straight away.
And so just to illustrate the point
of why we've picked longer term outcomes,
it's really important that we keep our sites
or does on behalf of the system, on those big, um,
challenging, um, outcomes.
Not withstanding, um, the audit report did ask
that we look at, um, some short
and medium term outcomes as well.
And so we will continue
to look at those longer term outcomes,
but we have the opportunity now with the refresh
of our strategic intentions due, uh, in, in June, 2025.
And we've started that work to look at some of those medium
to short term outcomes as well.
Um, so in terms of your question, where we've progressed,
I don't think we will change the longer term view.
Um, those are shared system long-term view outcomes
that we shouldn't, um, not lose sight of.
But also with the refresh, we have the opportunity now
to look at some of the short and medium term outcomes that
Is positive to hear
because I think there, there, you know,
I think there's broad agreement
around long-term outcomes is what we will want.
But, um, we are also here to hold your organization
to account of for the last year.
So we need to be able to see, so take, um,
what you've talked about housing, uh, we need to be able
to see the measurable difference that you,
that your team is making to that in the last 12 months.
So I, I, I think there's a chance to do both.
Um, and I would, uh, put it to you that, um, you know,
like you've said, uh, this refresh is a great opportunity
to really put some focus to the short and the long as well.
And there will be, um, opportunity for us to, um,
look more closely at, um, the areas
where we potentially lead in.
So we are not the lead in housing for example,
but we do have Papa Kga programs where we lead out
and we can share some of those outcomes,
but we'll talk a little bit later
around our monitoring role.
There's an opportunity there, uh,
to have a firm monitoring approach, hold the system
to account, but also provide some mentoring, um,
to show them what works.
And they've touched a little bit on this, so they kind
of converge, but we'll talk about that later. Yeah,
Yeah, because I think, uh, I think everybody here agrees
for years in decades we haven't been making progress.
So, uh, we want to be able to really see that, um,
we are actually making a difference
in the time that we've got here.
But we'll go to a question from Hana. Raffa might be Clark,
Sorry, chair. Sorry,
that's, can I just add to that? Yes.
Um, and it was something that Greg said at the end
of the last meeting that stuck in my mind.
I think, I think what you said,
and correct me if I'm wrong, was at the end,
well UNI is responsible of the outcomes for Maori mm-Hmm.
Um, we are not, that's the point I'd make for the committee.
The responsibility for is to promote the lifting
of achievements by Maori.
That's what we are responsible for, that's under our act.
And we do that by influencing those mainstream agencies.
No one has left them, left them off the hawk
and told them that they don't have
to do what they should do.
Maori are taxpayers, Maori are citizens. Mm-Hmm.
And they deserve to, to receive the same level of outcomes
that everyone else gets in New Zealand
that they need and deserve.
That's the first point. The second point is
that under the same act, section five, we monitor
and liaise with those agencies who are responsible
for delivering to Maori to ensure
the adequacy of that delivery.
That's our function.
What has happened over the years,
because that hasn't happened across the system.
We've been pushed into delivery. Yeah.
And we last delivered in housing.
And what these cabinet papers direct us to do is more,
do more, um, more monitoring and influencing and less doing.
So that worries me about the short term outcomes
because that's reliant on those other agencies.
My other point is that, um, the answer to
that would be monitor them harder,
but that hasn't worked either.
What we have to do is provide an alternative solution,
particularly for the $35 billion
that is spent on 15% of the population in an inefficient
and ineffective way.
I don't disagree with the, the point around accountability,
but I just wanna be clear about what our role is.
Mm-Hmm. Wonderful. Thank you Dave.
Um, I don't
know if this is actually appropriate watch place put in the
agenda, but correct me if I ask it enough.
Um, but I kind of, the last time since we've had a Hui,
the biggest organizational, um, change
that has happened has obviously been the disestablishment
of, and now taking on that responsibility.
And, um, I think just a few weeks ago
or a couple of, yeah, a few weeks ago we had a briefing
with Lil, um, around how she said majority
of the treaty settlements
that are left are the most complex ones.
Um, so I wanna just go down that rabbit hole around
what will the challenges, uh, be for, um,
on the horizon with now taking that responsibility as well.
Yeah, I mean to, um, we will allow the question,
but just we do have a future, um, session, um,
after the 11 o'clock break
and we're talking about the future, but,
um, you know, go ahead Dave. Okay.
Um, in terms of the functions that are coming across to,
to pretty ty, um, treaty settlements are not one of them.
So they remain with Tata.
So if I, um, was to paraphrase what has happened. Yeah.
Um, and there's more detail than this,
but very broadly, Tata Fiti currently carries
out four key functions.
The first one is the overarching treaty relationship,
the second is treaty settlements, the third is Marine
and Coastal Area ACT settlements.
And the fourth is lifting the
capability of the public service.
We are taking over the treaty relationship
and we're also taking over the lifting the public service
capability that leaves settlements in the red coastal area
with, um, so in,
in terms of those changes, if anything
that is a narrowing of the focus onto
the hard settlements, I would put it that part.
But we haven't received all the information yet in terms of,
um, the functions that's still still occurring.
Um, and, and as I say, it has to be complete.
You want Supplementaries
On, uh, I think we should just, um,
we've all the team have agreed around this strategic agenda
of which, uh,
we've got a whole hour talking about the future focus.
So I, I, I'd encourage the members to stick to the agenda
that we all agreed, which is organizational overview
and performance reporting.
Uh, we've got a lot of time, so, uh, we'll go now to,
um, David Cloud.
Thank you. And thanks. Uh, thank you.
You, uh, clarified, uh, particularly via, uh, your purpose
with regards the promotional
and the monitoring, the liaising with, um,
other delivery agencies.
My question is, is what influence do you have on other
agencies to be able to, uh, improve if, uh,
such improvement is required itself?
So what is the effect of, uh, your, your liaising with them?
Um, well, like, I guess I'm going back into the past,
which is what the review is about.
If I think of Maori housing, you know, over the last, um,
year, that was the end of, um, the,
the towards the end of the funding that was provided for.
And that was quite a significant fund
for lifting Maori housing.
And the influencing that we did was quite direct with the,
um, with, um, housing
and urban development to lift their ability to be able
to partner with Maori.
And that led to the establishment of TU
and that led to the establishment of,
and for the delivery of, um, a high number
of houses from the east coast.
And the Taranaki
and two other delivery entities have
been established as well.
One up north where there's need in the far north
and, um, one in Hastings and still in development mode.
But that is the influencing that I've been talking about.
The, the way in which we did that though was, um,
quite intense and very, um,
resource intensive from s perspective.
And my finding in that is that if I did that
for every department, it would probably take decades.
So we've gotta look at a system change,
and that's what I've spoken to you about
before, changing the system to move from a top down approach
to a bottom up approach, particularly for those hard
to reach communities locally, government names,
which the housing, the housing, um, prototypes are.
But we got, right, we, we built a housing team
to go next to them and do that.
And it was more about doing than actually, um,
than probably should have been, to be honest.
So if I could start have,
it's the same question in a different way.
Are you satisfied with the levers that you have
as an organization to influence?
Um, I, I think the, um,
the legislative levers
and cabinet directed levers are quite strong,
but the key to this though is identifying the solutions.
And there is a, there's a nexus between
localism, devolution the aspirations of Maori around
and social investment.
So you take the opportunities where they present.
I think that is an opportunity.
And so there are levers there that I am pulling
as hard as I can pull.
Um, and judge me on the success of that.
But if, if you do want to talk more about housing, I have,
um, here that can talk about the housing prototypes,
That's fine.
As Dave said, um, it's part
of budget 21 is this a significant, uh,
financial input into Maori housing,
even $730 million under the program.
And that program was led by Puni and HU
and the Starship, um, Starship, I guess flagship
approach of that program was the ing, which does
and Hu and Uni Coopering together supported those prototypes
to get established, to build the capability
and then to deliver, or in the process
of delivering over 530 houses to their people.
And these houses are in hard areas
which are not accessible to the crowd, for example,
go straight into your primary
and it's from partnering with these iwi prototypes
who know the communities,
who know the issues in the communities
and who can reduce the barriers, be able to provide
for housing in those areas as we remake those gaps.
And that is center locally led government negative
Off. Just on that
'cause, just to touch on a couple of points,
Maori land, many of you will be involved in Maori land,
but as you know, um, there are
unique characteristics around Maori land.
The act, uh, Maori has its dual purpose around retention
and economic development.
And of course the title, um,
multiple ownership creates some issues.
And then as the fragmentation occurs,
then there are governance issues.
Now, if any one of us, um, generally, generally,
if the public servant, a public servant turns up
to Maori landowners
and says to them, look, I know what you need
to do, they'll run a mile.
And that's because 484 years, um,
the Crown has been involved in alienating Maori land.
So the point I'm getting to was, first of all,
identifying that the public service cannot deliver
to all Maori because you can't with that sort of history.
'cause there is not the trust you need
to consolidate Maori landowners.
And if I think of what we did there, explaining
to a mainstream agency that you can't do this
is really difficult because public servants come here
to deliver and may not understand that history.
But then doing it with them
and explaining the value proposition
that the community can bring, if I think a toy two tight
150 land blocks with an average
of 52 owners, sorry, 52 hectares
and 111 owners per lamb block,
and that's spread over for iwi,
a public servant would not be able
to bring together a coalition of the willing.
But a Maori leader would be who's from there, locally led
whanau centered, knows those w and
and if you think of Willie, you know, he was at the center
of that, bringing those people together
to consolidate
and agree that they're going to have 150 land blocks
that we can build houses on.
Well, that's part of the solution
because the crown doesn't own land to that degree.
And that's how that worked.
But it was intensive for, we did change one department,
but if I tried to do this with 40 departments,
one department at a time, it wouldn't work.
So I've gotta look to the system.
That was a type of monitoring,
but it was monitoring by doing, monitoring by showing,
but it's not a system changer.
It may be a, a change in the housing system,
but it's not an overall system change.
Yeah. Thank you.
Um, next, next weary, um, in regards
to housing in the first instance,
and then I'll move to a primary.
Um, are there any of TP K's planned housing projects,
uh, that have been put on hold
or canceled as a result of governments?
Um, reset on housing?
Um, we're still delivering in housing.
We are still part of the iwi prototypes.
We are still part of,
we still invest in Papa kaa.
We still invest in critical repairs.
We still invest in capability programs for whanau.
We still invest in feasibility studies to get whanau
to a position where they can build.
Uh, we are still involved in policy
and making sure that you're shifting the system
and the policy threats.
Sure. So are you aware of any housing projects
that have been canceled
or put on as the result of this government's changes?
For example, I know of 2000
and Koto, um, I'm not familiar
with the numbers out in the region.
I'm, I'm not aware of that to be honest.
Um, I don't know whether you're talking about HUD's
responsibilities, rather thirty's responsibilities,
CPKs housing projects,
Uh, I'm not aware of any that I put on hold.
We, um, from memory
and pity, I'm a, you can correct me if I'm wrong, in terms
of the, um, the efficiency savings.
We, we didn't take any money out of housing. Right.
That's great. I'm gonna read you a, um,
a statement from a cabinet paper, which will set the, um,
following questions.
Um, I'm concerned that retaining targets
for a specific group
or groups of businesses based on ethnicity,
sends the wrong signal to agencies about awarding contracts.
First and foremost on public value.
I consider this approach, regardless of
how carefully it is implemented, leaves an impression
of an uneven playing field and a perception whether warrant
or not, of potential discrimination.
While funding for targeted supplier support expired in June,
this target remains in place.
And for these reasons, I propose the target is removed
and that this change be communicated to all agencies.
Of course, I'm talking about procurement here,
and I'd just like to understand TP K's view on how is, how
removing the progressive procurement level, um, the,
how does it level the playing field for Maori businesses,
particularly in the current economic environment.
And I just wonder your view in terms of
how you see Maori business competing against other large
agencies in that economic environment
and ensuring that they are meeting their potential
and keeping up and growing, uh, Maori businesses in Alua.
Um, the cabinet reference there, who,
whose cabinet paper is it?
Minister Nicola Willis. And, um, from, as the public service
or the treasury, or the social investment minister, uh,
as the finance minister, I understand,
but I'm seeking TP K's view on the fair playing field
and how that sets up Maori business.
I, I dunno the status of that if
that's government policy for
My and approaches Aligned with government.
So members, you guys,
you guys agreed this structured agenda
and, um, we're, we're really in the performance reporting,
reporting against performance of the financial year.
Um, I'm just, there's lots of time to ask these types
of questions, but I, I urge the committee to stick to
what you agreed to.
I don't really don't really care about structured agendas,
but, but you guys agreed to it.
So Mr. Chair, that you do
or you don't, you are seeking us
to follow the agenda and then
Yes. So we are, we are in,
we are in the
performance reporting. So
Just so can you guide me progress Progressive procurement,
which has been canceled by this government under TPK
is whereabouts, which part would you like me
to raise that if it's not
This one? You've got other matters,
which is part six
of the structured agenda.
No, I think it's part three.
It's economic resilience.
Okay, good.
So more questions about, um, performance reporting
auditor results. Um,
I, I, I actually have a question around the actual, um,
framework of like monitoring
and understanding like, is this frameworks
that work really well for Maori
and like, um, understanding, um, you know,
te Maori and like having that framework.
So are you confident that the framework that you use
for your performance reporting, um, is a good measure of,
of lifting those outcomes
For Maori Only me?
Um, the frameworks that we use are for the monitoring, yeah.
Monitoring government agencies. Yeah.
So there'll be frameworks to monitor them as opposed to,
to Maori amp empathy.
Mm-Hmm. So we just wanna talk about,
Yeah, I, I guess, um, I'm always interested in this, um,
yeah, the different frameworks that actually, um,
and if they work for Maori
and like you say, you're, you're doing it
for the, the agencies.
But yeah, I don't know,
there might be a question in there somewhere.
Mm-Hmm. We might be able to find something.
Let's talk about, um, what we do in terms
of monitoring. Yeah,
That'd be great. So,
um, based on the annual report, um, Dave's talked and,
and Tim link about what monitoring by doing looks like
or monitoring by delivery, so won't labor that point.
Um, but to your partai, does that work for Maori? Well, yep.
You can talk to Toi to that works, um, for Maori to, um, so
that is a framework, again, resource intensive
and approach that, um, we've used before, um, with,
and we can talk about, um, that as part of the other, uh,
frameworks that we've developed.
Um, one is actually a policy framework and that's, um,
and that framework, um, takes Maori view, um,
policies probably looking at policy's got quite a Western
approach when you, when you think about problem definition
and the policy cycle.
Um, but what TE Tahi does is help, um, Maori
and non non Maori, um, work through, uh, a policy framework,
um, that I guess is a connector between Al Maori and
or, um, so that is an example of, um,
what we would call a policy framework.
But the monitoring, um, monitoring is a foundation
or a basis of that from which we,
we can start to make assessment.
Um, Paula is actually leading the policy work
and can talk to the other area, um,
or frameworks that we use are, are quite data heavy.
And so, um, our role
or the, the position that we've taken is
to look at all the data,
administrative data from across the system data about
programs and look at it from a,
make an assessment from a Maori perspective.
Um, so those are at a high level, I won't bore you
with the detail of the frameworks,
but data by, uh, monitoring by delivery, uh,
and monitoring by data
and monitoring by influence and framework.
So the influence is, um, to things like
data is our role in assessing, um, what the, um,
agencies mm-hmm, deem, uh, publish.
And we take a Maori perspective and data by delivery.
Um, what we are doing at the moment with the department of,
uh, DPMC is we're actually looking at the
government targets mahi.
So each agency, um,
who is responsible across those nine target areas,
produce a report on how they progressing, um, uni, um,
are working with, um, DPMC to publish a, um,
I'd say independent report.
We get access to the same data
and we look at, make an assessment from a Maori perspective.
Our regional team behind us are really important to
that COPA because what we don't want to do is, um, publish,
uh, point the finger at what doesn't work.
Um, our regional insights team are really useful
and helpful on the ground, um, in ensuring that, um,
the things that are working for Maori on the ground have
been filtered through as some of the answers
to what's not working.
So it just gives a bit of a summary of
the different facets of monitoring
To respond to your just around
and how we are applying that reveal into our monitoring.
Um, we've actually, um, developed from, he had a way order,
uh, a set of audit indicators that we are hoping to into,
um, I guess the system to support the understanding
of Maori outcomes using that Maori,
What was that called?
Na that's the sort of indicators that underpin
built up the Levi status framework.
Thank you so much for that. Okay.
We've got a from LE please. Thank you.
Um, hello again everybody.
Um, just following off from, um, my colleagues question.
I know that you were saying
that you don't wanna point the finger when we are looking
at, um, assessments.
Um, so what role do you think TPK is able to
play with respect to holding, um, agencies
that you monitor and,
and help through leadership to account?
Um, accountability is an important, um,
and initiative started
with monitoring alone will not shift the dial.
So when we think of, um, the cabinet paper
that minister aka, um, has led, he talks about monitoring
and mentoring, that's, so in the monitoring, um,
we would define that as, um, sort of some
of the hard accountability settings, quite data heavy.
And in the mentoring, it's influencing, it's providing tools
so that the system provid, um, can do some
of that work themselves.
Um, so that's how monitoring alone won't work.
So accountability is important
and the reporting that we are doing with, uh, the targets
and DPMC, um, will show, um, what is
and what isn't working against those targets.
But we can't just publish that alone.
We need to also find out what works
and our regional team are helping us to find out
what works in the regions, um, for everyday New Zealanders,
but predominantly Maori and serve.
Um, so that's how I would, that's how I would frame it.
So, following from that,
and I'm trying to be as delicate as possible,
but does that equal accountability?
And I, and I respect like everyone lives really young, hard,
but, and, and, and I guess
after that, a question about, I think it goes
to our statutory, um, our legislation,
which is our legislative mandate, which is
to liaise and monitor.
Um, there are some limitations of that.
I do think that the government targets do present an
opportunity where full focus of the public service
and this government is on making sure we reach those targets
for all New Zealanders.
And our role is to tell the story.
And by telling the story,
we're helping the governments hold other agencies to account
for the targets from a Maori perspective.
So I think realistically that's our biggest avenue,
and that's the area where we're focusing
to influence the most.
But again, we can't just produce dashboards
and data that tell other agencies they're
not doing well for Maori.
It needs to be supplemented with, um,
the mentoring component, which is the direction
that minister support has given.
I think I would add that there's the,
the policy leadership dimension is the other part.
'cause I, uh, in relation to accountability, you, you have
to make visible what are the standards
and, um, what are the standards, um, of what,
of what we expect.
And that's, that's potentially different from targets.
So in a policy leadership area, um, what you can,
what we are doing and what we have done,
and if I take the, um, experience that we have,
uh, is that, uh, we know across the motu
and one of the most difficult things for people to
grow their Papa KAA
or establish Papa kaa, um,
there are many barriers in the planning
and consenting process.
And so the work that we've done for the period
and review is we, uh, looked across, uh, all
of the district plans of, uh, councils to ascertain,
which had provisions, uh, that enabled the development
of Papa kaa, uh, which had,
and which who were doing what, what was, what was happening,
or who were the ones who were doing it really well.
As a result of that, we were able to collect all of
that information, and now the opportunity exists
through the current resource management, um, reforms
that are happening, um, where we are, uh,
leading the work on a national direction for Papa Kaa.
So that brings through our experience, um, in relation to,
uh, Papa Kaa,
but also it helps to then set a system standard
for councils, um, that will enable them to be able
to support the development of papa, which goes back
to the long term goal of housing being available
and people being able to grow, um, to,
uh, build on their land.
Um, so the part
around the system setting is the policy leadership, um,
opportunity in play,
and then you would come around, I guess it's the other side
of the coin, and then be able to monitor once the once
and assuming, uh, that work progresses, you'll be able
to monitor the extent to which papa are now being enabled
through those, um, changes in policy that have happened.
Um, so it's about, so it's uh, it's almost a push
and a pull if I think about the policy lead leadership lever
that we have, um, and also
and also the monitoring responsibilities.
Thank you, Paula. My next question?
Yeah, you had another one, sort my next question. Great.
Okay. So we're now through parts one
and two of the structured agenda.
Next we go onto part three,
which is progress on Maori economic resilience initiatives.
Um, so we will start, thanks. Yep, sure.
Shannon and then Greg.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So just going back, um,
to the comments from Minister of Finance, Nicola Willis.
Uh, and just for reference,
that was the needs based cabinet circular, uh, which is
for all public service agencies, including TPA.
Um, my question for you is, how is removing progressive
procurement, how does it level the playing field
for Maori businesses,
particularly in the current economic environment
when Maori businesses would often have to compete
with larger corporate entities
for procurement opportunities?
What has changed?
I'm not sure, Um, whether I'm being asked
to comment on government policy
here, give an opinion.
Uh, what's, what are you wanting here?
I guess the question is what, what has changed for TPK,
uh, with their progressive procurement for Maori business,
given the circular that's been outlined by the minister?
Okay. Okay. So Megan,
I might double team on this if it's all right.
Um, so you are correct.
The progressive procurement, uh, uh, policy
that was in place, uh, the program came to an end in June,
uh, earlier this year as well.
The program had a mix of, um, a few things in, in play
and it, and it's actually a joint program that we did with,
um, MV as well, um, where we had a mix
of the setting of government set targets, uh, in relation
to the extent
to which government agencies were procuring from Maori
businesses, um, as well as investment in a,
what we call a capability uplift program, which was
specifically designed, targeted at Maori businesses so
that they could, um, help them, help them navigate
through the system effectively, um, uh, identify
that they were a Maori business, um,
set up their infrastructure so that, um, uh,
could participate in the government's procurement process,
um, but also help them step through what, you know, um,
actually that the, all the government procurement process
exists and that they do have some products that they can,
uh, that the government would be interested in
purchasing from them.
Um, so tho and,
and, um, that was done mostly at a regional, uh, level
through, uh, a number of entities that were responsible for,
for developing that capability uplift.
And it, and it went from a mix of quite a light touch
of workshops through to some quite intensive, um, support
for businesses to help, um, get into the, uh,
get in a position where they were able to procure once, uh,
sorry, once they're able to tunnel for the,
for the services, um, that didn't do anything about, um,
once they got into the system, it was a level playing field,
so they still had to, um, earn the, uh, contracts
that were available on their own merit.
But it was about being able to bring people
to the start line, so to speak.
Um, and also to be able to have agencies, um,
actually even realize there were a whole lot of businesses,
particularly in the regional space, that could, uh,
provide services, um, in a really, really effective way
and probably get more bang
for the investment than necessarily
they thought might be the case.
So that was the, the, the premise
of the progressive procurement, um, work, uh, that was done.
And then, and that came to an end
and the idea was that we would, um, move the learnings from
that time limit, the time limited funding that we got,
and the, and the work that had been, um, done as part of
that program back into a, like BAU activity in effect.
Um, because this is actually being able to see how does,
if you go back to how does government be most effective in
the way that it wants to impact all of this sort
of stuff should just be part of our business,
ordinary business process.
But the specific investment site,
progressive pro procurement kind of show,
give the opportunity to show
what is possible if you do a little bit of a, you know,
shine a little bit of a spotlight in a particular area.
And the idea is to, to move that back into in these, um,
ordinary progress, uh, procurement services, if you like,
and their standards that they have for procurement,
for all government services.
Um, so you wanna talk to the change in the needs and,
and so forth that Mr.
Hilbert has talked to. So there, um,
Was a cabinet circular that talked about, uh,
the provision of services based on the not race, uh,
with regard to procurement.
Uh, there is gonna be a report back
to cabinet early next year,
and that situated report back from the Minister
of Maori Development and the Minister
for Business Innovation and Employment.
So that report back will cover, uh,
evaluation of the program.
And like Paula said, uh, the, I guess the successes
and achievements of the program,
but also recommendations for how we might be able
to embed some of the things that we learned
through the progressive procurement prototype
and the business capability uplift, having the targets,
but also having the reporting systems in place,
which is still in place.
Um, and what we've learned from that
and how that can then be, I guess, transferred
or picked up within the broader procurement system.
And that is MBS lead
as the functional procurement lead for government. Mm-Hmm.
Is it, um, TP K's understanding interpretation
that Maori were participating in an
unfair playing field in this sense
as per the minister's circular?
Just going back to your point around
the process was about assisting Maori business to get
to the starting line, the minister's saying something quite
different here, that it create an uneven playing field.
What's, how does TPK reconcile this
and continue a by Maori for Maori approach?
Hmm. Um, so what,
and we can't, the idea, um, of, uh, social procurement,
how you, um, uh,
progressive procurement did come within the, um, came to us,
um, within the context
of the indigenous collaborative agreements that we have,
particularly with Canada, but also with Australia.
Um, and so it was an idea of, um, as I understand it, um,
yeah, how do you get more business,
more Maori businesses participating in, um,
across the system in a wider way?
And also acknowledging, uh, today's point that some
of the points that Dave made earlier on, that, um,
we actually need people who are able to, um,
connect into communities
that the public service can't ordinarily, um, uh, uh,
get into, um, who are more trusted, um, and so forth.
So the idea of being able to invest, um, with,
uh, mining businesses in order just to open up the world
of possibilities is one that historically to Pinco has been,
you know, well involved in, and you could call it capability
and capacity building.
Um, you could call it a regional, uh, forum, uh, forum
that we, that we had.
So there's a number of different versions of this that have,
that I think has led over the years.
Um, the idea of being able to expose what is,
um, what is quite important, uh, opportunity in terms
of economic development for Maori businesses, I think is
what the progressive procurement, uh, program has been able
to show that there is a need, uh, in terms of being able
to support business owners.
Um, when you think about, uh, Maori businesses,
there's about 22,000, um, SMEs, um, that identify
as Maori, um, across the, across the, um, uh,
across the tu.
And so this, this is a really important
opportunity to be able to,
So just to go back to my original question, which is
what has changed, and I'm,
and that'll help Michael a bit finicky here,
but I'm just trying to clarify, is
how are we assisting Maori business
to get to that start line?
Has that ended, um, given the, um,
the discontinuation of funding?
Or are you doing it by other means?
And if so, what are those other needs?
Um, do you wanna talk about?
We, so the progressive procurement is, uh,
a particular policy that, uh, we were involved in
and that we helped lead.
Um, and alongside that though, we do have, um, investments
that we make through business growth, uh, fund
for business growth, which again, which has its, uh,
origins if you like, in, um, capability
and capacity building.
And I wonder if I can just ask Karen
to just talk a little bit about, um, uh, that, which goes
to, I think, uh, an answer to your question.
Mm-Hmm. But before we do,
I think there's a distinction here between a prototype
and the responsibility
of clinical colleagues under section five of the act,
we are responsible for promoting increases in the levels
of achievement Mm-Hmm.
Of Maori across the whole spectrum in public service,
specifically in the act it talks about education, training,
health and economic resource development.
So we still do that, and that's what Karen will talk to.
But there's, there's a distinction here between the,
the prototype and what we do to achieve that,
which was one thing we were doing to achieve Section five,
the, thanks, Dave, Karen.
Um, so that book has become really set alongside, um,
the facilitation brokerage, um, from our advisors, um,
supporting businesses to access support from other agencies.
Um, and we do have a small range of funds, which you, um,
seen that provides a broad range, has
provided a range of support to many businesses.
So that's everything from flex roots businesses to startups,
um, those SMEs, they're looking to grow, um, right through
until breakthroughs and scales into, um, larger technology
and new sectors.
So in 2040 3, 24, we invested in six, six Maori businesses,
um, along those lines.
Um, and in particular the support focused on new product
development, uplifting strategic planning,
management capabilities, branding
and marketing opportunities.
Alright. Thank you Karen. Um,
We'll go to New line of inquiry from it actually.
Yeah, yeah. Line of inquiry supplementary around this, um,
um, probably may have actually answered my question.
It might, the answer might be in self-identification,
but just what are the parameters
for whether a business is a Maori business?
You asked this question last time, didn't you?
So, um, there's a couple of measures we use about, if I go
to it is 50% of the ownership of Maori who, um, uh, ident
of, um, the owners identify as Maori, so, right.
Um, and ethnicity is one, but you can also do ethnicity
and descent, um, as well, which has means
that the percentage goes slightly lower.
Um, so we use the wha are you identify your ethnicity
as Maori, 50% of the owners of the business are Maori,
and that therefore you are a Maori business.
Okay, thank you very much. And presumably in iwi is,
it says your focus area goal is to champion growth
and opportunities for Iwi and Maori business.
I pre presume an iwi business is one that's owned
and run by Iwi.
Yes, yes. And we think about, uh, in, in, in a economic,
uh, uh, sorry, in a framework where you sort of think about
economic, uh, our economic focus about being around au Yes.
Um, and that gets you into sort of employment opportunities
and income that's going into a household
or, you know, um, at, at that level.
Then you might have a ca
where we would broadly ca categorize things
around iwi and Maori collectives.
Yeah. And then you have p Maori.
And so we think about the landscape of Maori,
of the Maori economy in relation to those three, um,
yeah, those three categories if you like,
which means those about where we focus in terms
of investment of our brains and then,
and then our monitoring as well.
And the other component, just adding to that is, um,
Maori authority is identified, um, by inate revenue.
Oh, great. Okay. Got it.
And this actually, um, in some ways might pivot back to
where I just wasn't quite sure when to come in.
And so it might require, um, Timothy again,
but I just wanna keen to ask about C ps
Chips.
Yeah. Particularly with obviously some of the, um, the,
the potential growing potential in that space now.
So where does that, um, fit within your, the, the, um, um,
TKs work, uh, in terms of, uh, well, not just, um,
but um, more broadly in terms of, um, the
Delivery body housing? Sure.
So community housing providers are the responsibility
of HU as you probably, um, understand Yeah.
How our iwi prototypes,
and this is the evolution of the iwi prototypes, sorry,
this is the evolution of the iwi prototypes.
They are looking to go into more wider housing.
It's not just affordable rentals Yeah. Or home ownership.
It is now looking to go wider in terms
in terms of social housing.
And so, um, that's how we support, uh, that co-op.
Okay. Okay.
Can I jump, jump on this up? Yep. Thank you.
Um, yeah, I'm really interested in, um, e housing solutions
and particularly, you know, we're from the Green Party,
so we're always interested in the
sustainability aspect of it.
And I know that, um, some of these prototypes that, um,
for housing that Iwi are developing are very steeped in that
t Maori and, um, living in harmony with Aran and Papa.
So could you tell us a little bit more about
the sustainability of those housing prototypes?
Um, what do you mean by the sustainability?
I guess it's living in harmony with nature
and like, like looking at those solutions.
So solar panels, different ways of like, actually, um,
building within like the, in that the environment
and, um, and,
and in a papa kind of way, like, so going back to, um,
that community living that iwi living and, um,
and living in harmony with nature. Yeah.
I guess I'll, I'll make one comment
before I refer to my colleague here.
George, um, Papa Kga in particular,
and the iwi prototypes allow UA
to connect back to the ua.
And that relationship between UA and UA been unbroken
and the positive outcomes that that has on,
on communities, on regions is incredibly important.
And that can't be underestimated.
And so that reconnection that could lead to,
could then a more involvement in Mara
intergenerational living, you know,
it's endless, absolutely endless.
Called George Meki talking, um, regional director,
just, um, building on my colleagues, uh, response.
Um, I'd just like to give a a a simplistic,
practical example of, um, having a sit down conversation
with whanau that had been able to build on their UA
and live the way that they wanted to live.
And so 12 months
and from being on their, living on their UA in,
in their new housing development, um, I was able
to have a conversation and say, so, uh, tell me
what it's like a year living on your funeral
in your housing development.
I said, well, we are living in brand new warm housing
and we've never ever had that opportunity before.
So because we are living in brand new warm housing,
the kids aren't getting sick anymore.
So we're not having to spend money taking them
to the doctors because the kids aren't getting sick anymore.
They're in school all the time.
So they're doing really well at school educationally, um,
because we're able to live, um, intergenerationally on our,
we've now got grandparents that live on the papa along with,
so when the kids come home from school,
there's always grandparent available there.
So when they come home to care for them, um, what
that enables then is some of the young moms
and dads to then seek employment.
Uh, whereas before they hadn't been able to,
'cause they had to be there for their, their, um,
because they've got their grandparents on onsite,
they were teaching, uh, the, their una about their
teaching them about, uh, some
of the nannies were teaching 'em how to weave.
So they had this, um, kind of intergenerational transmission
of Ma Maori from grandparents on to,
they then said, you know, George living, um,
in this public development, what we realized is instead
of getting a wheelie bin for each of the houses,
we've gotta skip bin for the whole community.
And it was like half the price of getting wheelie bin.
So they were starting to achieve economic outcomes.
And we're talking one year into the development. Mm-Hmm.
So, yeah, as I say, just building on my colleagues
and Kia, thank you so much.
Can I just quickly say, um, which one should we go visit?
You are more than welcome to come up to you for after
and then many papa to come.
Yeah. Um,
Your question from, okay.
Alright. If you, um, just on this, this, um, uh,
around housing, um, the, the numbers show us
that there's been quite a downward, um, trend when it comes
to Maori, um, living in an occupied homes or,
or land owned by iwi or, or hapu or a Maori, um, trust.
Can you provide us with any insight, I know kind
of briefly touched on the subject, um, in the kind
of opening time of this, um, this corridor,
but can you give us some insight into why
there has been a downward trend
and anything that will be, uh, TPK can perhaps,
um, lead in doing differently to, to change
that from downward or better position?
Yeah. I'll be really interested in obtaining, um,
that report as to that downward treat.
Uh, because if I claim, if I were on a program
we provide for a thousand affordable rentals
over four years, the has already contracted over
600 affordable rentals through its housing program.
Um, so
Sorry to interrupt you say, is
that number a bit surprising to you?
Uh, yeah. Okay.
It is, I mean, it, it is not the number,
the downward trend based on the amount of investment
that has happened over the last few years.
And then we also have, but what punny corty can do, we can,
we can directly invest as we have been,
but we also, as Paula touched on,
we can change the policy settings
to enable national direction to enable housing on, on,
to be easier for district councils to have
to include it in their plans.
Okay. Um, just one question from me.
Uh, Maori business, um, uh,
I think Paula, you said, how many Maori businesses do you
identify with, uh, New Zealand?
22,000. 22,000.
So how'd love to know how TPK is supporting those 22,000
to commercialize, upscale, expand.
Um, I know TPK has got limited resources, so, um,
what's your strategy around support to the masses
in a really low cost sustainable way
that makes the biggest difference, whether it's skills,
finance, upskilling, you know, access to connections,
markets and so forth.
Love to know what TP K's role in
expanding Maori business be.
Is that, um, so broadly right across the,
the board in terms of our investment strategy?
Well, yeah. So out of the 22,000,
how many, what's your impact?
Right. Okay.
Um, I'll just ask Karen McGinnis to come up here
and talk about any investments
and then Vanta can give an example on the ground.
Again. Um, as kind touched on
before, um, we have, you know,
very small amount of, of funding.
So the funding that that we do have can only support a,
a limited number of businesses.
Um, but what we do try
and do is we can with other agencies, um, to, to partner,
to facilitate and,
and broker into those other funding areas.
One of the things that we are doing is that we are trying
to, um, shift our focus a little bit to
make inve investments
of sufficient scale now rather than really,
really small investments that, um, are fantastic,
but they might just, um, support a very small business
and a small number of employees.
So we're trying to lift
and, um, support larger scale,
more really investments that can pathway to other funding,
such as private investment or the, the RIF funding.
So we are targeting support at that level, at scale.
Um, and alongside that, we are trying to target businesses
to support them to lift, uh, an uplift of the skills
of their employees to a higher level.
So, um, higher national standards like level four
and level five, um, to, to actually be able to, um,
increase their incomes at a greater level.
Kiara, um, can I, um, Mr. Chair? Yeah.
Um, if I can just follow up Timothy,
it's page 56 of annual annual report.
Um, it's, it's data collected, um,
on the different censuses.
So, sorry, I just want to confirm
that I wasn't just bringing up figures.
Yeah. If you'd see page 56
under Maori economic resilience, um, housing
proportion of Maori living in an owner occupied home
or home owned by Iru
or Maori Land Trust, um,
was 47.2% in 2018,
and then 27.5 in 2023.
But that's okay. We can revisit that.
I can, I can answer that.
Um, so my team pulled the data together.
The reason why it's trending down, um, in the last year is
because of the interest rates have been higher
and that hasn't had an impact on, uh,
people entering into the, um, market
and for ma uh, so that's for everyone.
It's been quite challenging Yes.
Because of, um, the interest rates very high
and for Maori, um, they're more impacted than mainstream
because of the average incomes being lower.
Yeah. Um, and the also it's had a down trend, uh,
so you feel there's quite a strong correlation
between the very high interest rates that happened.
And so, um, we, well, yes,
because that's the data, um, that's been
provided to us from SAT nz.
Um, and so we've worked with them on the trend.
So we don't hold all the data. Yeah.
We don't hold any administrative data.
Um, we take long-term outcomes, uh, data from stats nz.
So that's, that's what, um, we've assessed on
Drop. Yeah. It is
a going from 40 to seven down after a quarter.
Yeah. Incredible. Yeah.
Is that the right data? Would it just be in
the, the financial year?
It would've, uh, it, there will be a a, a trend down over
a long period of, of time.
So, but that's how it's reflected. Yeah.
So is this measuring then from, this is not just,
even though it reads the, the, the, the headings
of the table suggest that you read this in 12 months,
but it's not, wouldn't that, that's not correct.
Reading it year by year is correct.
Um, but there are other factors that influence each year
that are not just within that time period.
Sure. 'cause it's, these are long term outcomes as opposed
to just looking at year by year.
So, um, for example, if people were, um,
made unemployed in covid, the impacts might happen
for them two years later that there's a long tail.
Oh, yeah. Um, so it's not just,
it could be a cumulative Yeah.
Perhaps over those period of time for
what has happened across, um, a wau
or individual's life, life term.
Can I start, this is a question I about Holly,
I wasn't sure to answer it within the first one
or when we get to looking at Wau order,
Look Yeah, we're, we're just, um, yeah, for members,
we are, we're in, we can transition now
to wau order centered approaches, part four.
But, um, you know, look, we've got 20 odd minutes,
so if you want to kind of bounce around
between part three and part four, go ahead.
Okay. Well this, I mean this, this question probably sits
just as well here is any time, any type, which is to what?
And, and, and, and it goes back to the Dave earlier, um,
verification and, um,
and for, um, f*****g, um,
um, but in terms of that measurement, um, are
how are we able to go back, um, say 15 years
and see these, these changes, these kinds of measures
that we've been talking about for the last hour
and a half, uh, over that kind of timeframe.
It's just, and, and,
and that's just one window in what we're talking about here,
is that actually seeing them in 12
or even 24 months just actually doesn't really provide us
with particularly helpful data.
Um, yes, we could, but sorry,
Can I just, um, on that,
'cause we are talking about the housing data first,
it's just note two there.
I think it's quite interesting.
Um, and about the, um,
the improvements in data collection,
You mean in terms of the footnote
Yeah, footnote too, there,
I think provides some explanation to that, right?
Like you, I was looking at this
and going, man, that is significant.
Yeah. The, the improvements in the data collection and
and methodology in the 2023 census, um,
was considered more reliable.
Okay. So, Yeah.
Sorry, my, but I Yeah, no, that's good to know.
One point to that. Sorry.
Yes, but I don't have that information Okay. In front now,
Just, well, and, and maybe then more broad,
more broadly without wanting to, as I said, without wanting
to, to, to disrupt the gender and canvas outta ground.
Just wasn't sure where to, where to bring this question is,
and maybe we, maybe I put it out
and we bring it up in general business,
but it's really just, uh, as I read this whole report,
I found myself, um, keep coming back to the same thing,
which is the, this this measurement that the limitations
of measuring things on a 12 to 24 month basis when,
when really what the whole, the whole
after uni property is to, um, is to show
and hold it well hold, hold, hold the,
the whole public service to account of the outcomes
for Maori over an extended period of time.
So seeing, seeing that over a significant period,
and we'll, we'll see this when we get to au order.
I don't know, are we in au order? Yeah,
Yeah. No, that
Just as well the same, it's the same.
It's essentially the same question
that I wanna ask there as well.
But perhaps we're gonna talk about the
long term insights briefing.
Um, we have 20,
we got about 20 minutes before we break,
and then we are looking at the future focus,
so, and other matters.
So, um, quick, Greg, what's your question?
Because you've put a lot out there.
What, what's your specific question?
Are we, Are we able to, is to critically able
to measure and,
and show us, show us the data over 15
to 20 years rather than over 12 to 24 months?
Yes, we can access that data. Okay.
Are you asking if we can report on that?
Yeah. And then going forward to, to,
to keep, to add to that?
Yes. Yeah, no, that, that,
that point there highlights the first point we were
discussing around the outcomes
and being pushed to short term outcomes.
Yeah. Correct. We have to take a longer term, longer term,
uh, approach. But
You can, it's an and and, right.
You can do both. Um,
Well, it's, um, you know, you can, it's just
where you put your effort. Yeah. Yeah.
Uh, we'll just go now
to a question from right on, right Adrian
Chair. Um, my
question is around, uh, centered approaches, um,
and, um, noting that there's there plan
to have cross-agency Onega, um, would like
to hear a bit about that.
Um, and I wanna ask question I asked about eight years ago,
let see if anything's changed.
Um, and, and that is, um, can you point to a,
an agency that has, um, gold standard, um,
interaction in terms of, um, wano centered approaches.
Um, and so I'll make, give, give this, my sub on
that is have you ever thought about having some kind
of rating system to, um, apply to all agencies
that they have some, a goal to aim for?
Correct. Here's the gold standard
and that's where they need to be able to.
Yeah. So maybe if I, um, off
and, um, uh, with this, so thank you for the question.
Um, so we think about whanau centered approaches, um,
both being, as you've said, there's a system wide approach,
and then there's some specific things that leads
through the whanau order.
Um, all the particular investments we make in whanau order
through the commissioning agencies.
And we also have some prototypes like tu
um, teta, which are partnering with other agencies,
um, around a particular you
to focus on a particular set of outcomes.
I think about the whanau centered approaches.
Um, we, the cross agency Ang, um, was, uh,
I guess an initiative that, um, we,
we could see was important.
When you're talking about Whanau center, um, approaches,
you need to be able to get everybody on the same page
with respect to that.
Uh, so the, and the cross-agency work, um,
has helped we think to strengthen, well, to make visible
what, how do people think about whanau centered approaches
and what are some examples of that in action.
Uh, but coupled with that, we also undertook a survey of,
um, uh, across 16 agencies, um, to under to figure out
how do people under, what's the public sector knowledge of,
um, the characteristics of wau centered approaches.
What came out of that survey was that generally people, um,
under, they are familiar with the characteristics
of whanau centered approaches,
but they do find it quite hard to work within a,
within a whanau centered approach and,
and do not have, uh, confidence to be able to work in
that particular way.
Now, um, that could quite possibly be that
because the system is quite individualized.
Um, that's how our, the, the system is focused.
Um, but there could be other things just in terms
of people's capability and experience in this space.
So the baseline survey was about understanding
where are we at and how do we then support, um,
through our influence, through our monitoring role,
but also the potential of setting standards, um, around
what does, what does this look like when this is in play.
So back to the accountability piece, if you're not sure
what this is supposed to look like, then it's quite hard
to get to, um, to understand what your, what your target is
and where you are heading to, let alone
how you report on it,
and what's the monitoring that that is done towards that.
So that is something that, um, we would like
to look at in the, in as a future piece of mahi
around setting standards with, in relation
to whanau centered approaches.
And we can go to some of the prototypes
and actually our experience through whanau order
that helps us to, um, make visible what are some
of those really important characteristics, terms
of a gold standard.
That's, I'd have to, I wouldn't want to call anybody out
what's best see some gold
Standards, best, best organization.
Um, so maybe that is something that we can come back
to the committee with, but I might ask,
I'll, I'll call it. Okay.
It's,
but it's not in the whanau water category.
But in terms of, uh, whanau centered,
locally led government enabled hud
Hud, right? Yes. In the
prototypes. And, and that was
because they shifted their whole system.
It became permissive Yeah.
In order to engage with Maori,
because they, the public value proposition was
the community could do this.
They could bring together a coalition of,
of the willing the community had the trust,
the community could build that scale
and that pace on Maori land
and the public service couldn't, took a, took a bit of time
and effort to get, um, to get them to,
to see the opportunity, but they're running with it now.
Mm. And, and all credit to the, um, the chief executive,
the leader of, um, HUD for his, um,
his commitment to do that.
'cause that's quite pardon for a mainstream agency.
And you're talking about millions, hundreds of millions
of dollars, 700 and $730 million.
Um, so it came around,
but that was intense, um,
discussions. Yeah.
Good. Thank you for Thank you. Calling it.
So we might get hu in
and, um, to elaborate more, so that's great.
Thank you. Um, more questions on funnel order
or, um, I might ask one.
So it's just related to the, um, performance metrics
that you've got for funnel order.
A lot of them are, um, uh, of what what I,
what I'd describe as either probably outputs at a,
at a maximum, at a best case.
So number of ana engage through general commissioning.
Um, how do we assess how well au order is doing in terms
of the outcomes it's achieving as a,
as a initiative and as a program.
Do you, are you, are you, is TPK doing some work around
actually transitioning from more of an outputs?
We've done this, we've organized this, we're doing this to,
here's the impact
and the difference that ANA order is making on,
and I know it's attribution and Yeah. Oh
Yeah. Oh good. I've, I've
landed that message.
Um, and no other public service
agency can prove attribution Yes.
Wanna make that point, not just the Maori programs. Yep.
No one beyond level two. Um, but so I won't
Say that then.
Course. Thank you for that question.
Um, last time when we came
and spoke with the committee, um,
we talked about whanau order
and the opportunity to reset whanau order.
And since that time we've embarked on a procurement process
going out to market for the first time, um,
for commissioning services.
That's a active procurement process,
but I can share some of the details about the design
that sits behind that.
Um, perhaps most fundamentally is we are looking
to position whanau order for social investment.
So whanau order works, we know it works.
We know that it can deliver in ways
that the public service will never be able to deliver.
Um, I think at the outset we talked about monitoring
and about how, you know, do we have enough levers
and depends on the public service, there will be parts
of our communities that will never be able
to be serviced by the public service.
Mm-Hmm mm-Hmm. They would just never be able to get there.
And that's primarily because of trust
or mistrust more openly.
Um, it's because of the way the public service is organized
in terms of focus on the individual.
So we talk about prisoners,
we talk about students, we talk about patients.
And so a whanau centered approach is really a bit
of a square peg, round hole, um, situation.
We also have a challenge that the public service
fundamentally believes it knows best.
And so being able to devolve power to communities, um,
again, feels counterintuitive to the public service.
That said, we know that whanau order works
because it puts whanau at the center.
It makes sure that whanau voice is always at the
heart of what is being done.
Um, it makes sure that the, um, the inherent logic
and strength of a whanau in the way in which every whanau
operates, um, is built upon as opposed
to being fixed or delivered to.
And so wana order as a, as an apparatus
for delivering effectively, um, is the best thing we believe
that the public service can go to in order to make sure
that those hard to reach, uh, communities receive services.
So what are we doing to position
whanau order for social investment?
Fundamentally, there are a number of shifts,
but one of the key ones is around making sure
that all the data from whanau order from one July
with the new contracts in place will go into the IDI
once data is into the IDI
and we're talking about the spine of the IDI,
where it can then be correlated with outcomes.
We can see which communities, um, are having, which I,
which impacts are occurring in communities based on those w
order services because we believe that whanau order
has a ripple effect beyond just the, um, immediate service
that might be, um, delivered to that whanau.
And having the, um, the IDI data
and being able to report upon that on a quarterly basis
and being able to track that, we'll also be able to, um, see
where the more difficult, um, au
and more difficult communities need more intensive services.
And so we're looking to strengthen the number of navigators
through the procurement process
by moving resources out to the front line.
So this again, is sort separating out commissioning services
from actual whanau order front, um, line delivery.
You're right that the current performance metrics are,
are very, um, output focused about number
of whanau, number of interactions.
We need to move away from that
to get a much more granular understanding
of which whanau and which communities.
The procurement process that we are running is based on, um,
going out to tender for services on the deprivation index
that came out through census 20, uh, 23.
So we're looking at those communities
where deprivation is greatest communities with eight, nine,
or 10 on the deprivation index.
Again, to make sure that whanau order
is resourced appropriately.
We communities need it most.
So we're looking forward to going back, um,
at the annual review this time next year
and being able to report on what's happening
with our new services.
The IDI data will start to go in, in the first two quarters
of, um, the 25 26 year,
but it won't be until January, 2026
that we'll get the reporting out from that. Thanks
Christ. We've got a supplementary
from Right. Honorable Adrian.
Thank you. Partially answered the this,
but thank you for the information.
It's really appreciated. I just wanted to know,
um, a couple of things.
One is, um, when will that process, um,
basically the end?
Um, and I asked a question, um,
I've asked questions previously around, um, organizations
that deliver one order, um, service
but are not funded through that, um, process that,
that funding allocation
and whether, yeah, I suppose Ally, I won't ask that
'cause it might compromise. Uh,
No, I can answer that question,
Sorry. But yeah, I am
interested in whether, um, they might be able
to be able to participate through this as well. Yes.
So we commenced, uh, the recruitment process
earlier this year
and we went out with a registration of interest, which is,
um, an ROI, um, and it was open so anyone in the community
and we received a number of respondents, uh,
responses from respondents who are working in the area
but are not necessarily funded
through the current fund or appropriation.
Cool. And so it was good to be able to go to market
and to, um, flush out expressions of interest.
Um, we then took that through an evaluation panel
and we didn't have a shortlist of respondents
that shortlist have now been issued with the RFP,
the request for proposals.
Um, and it's currently with respondents to, um,
pull together their response.
And that's due in on the 19th of December.
We are then evaluating that, um, across December, January,
um, with a view to having a, a preferred respondent for each
of the four regions that were going out to market for, um,
around mid-February.
The view then is that we will spend time with the contract,
um, negotiations, implementation
with services going live from one July next year.
Great. Uh, supplementary on that and David, thanks Grace.
Um, this, uh, it's a long process
I've witnessed in certain communities
where ROIs from government scares a lot
of capable organizations away just
because of the enormity of that there.
How can you be assured
that you're not actually missing out on some great
opportunities of potentially smaller, uh, community groups
that do really good work in this space?
Yeah, for sure that, that's a good part.
I, the, um, the procurement is for commissioning services
and the commissioning services are essentially the umbrella
that sits across far water providers.
And so one of the key components
of the procurement process is, um, the commissioning,
the potential commissioning agencies demonstrating
and reassuring us that they have the reach
with the service providers across all of the communities in,
in order to be able to deliver effectively.
And so what we are seeing coming through is, um,
that being validated with, uh,
respondents saying these are the providers we have
throughout the community and some of 'em are very small,
but some of these communities are very small
and in, um, areas
where there may only be one provider or two providers.
And so we are really, um, strengthening the, the criteria
and the waiting around making sure they've got the
capability and the service provider level, uh, to have
that reach into those communities.
Any more questions on part four or five team?
Alright, well, um, we now break for, um, hi.
And bit of time for, so we've got 15 minutes break.
Um, we actually bang on schedule, so well done team stand
and we'll come back at 1115 and we'll go into private,
You know,
Part which is the future for TPK, uh, what does
that look like and any other related matters
that the members wish to cover.
So, um, do any particular members wish to start?
Yes, Greg Blooming. Can we, um, dive deeper into
where you, this
Is before the break, um, around the, the,
the developing relationship
between BK and research investment.
Yes. Uh, so in terms of the procurement process, um,
you'll understand that that's now to position wana order
for future social investment.
And that's because the current appropriation
for wana order is $175 million.
Now that, that's not to be sniffed at, that's a, um,
a good investment But if we think about the $70 billion
that goes into social services annually,
it's 0.25%.
It's a quarter of a percent
of investment goes into Wana water, despite the fact
that we know Wana Water works,
and despite the fact that there's evidence about it reaching
hard to reach communities in Whanau,
it only receives a quarter of a percent of the social, um,
services investment each year.
And so the positioning of Wau order with the IDI
and with social investment is
to strengthen the case to shift the money.
Wau order is an apparatus
that can be used across the social services.
And the new procurement that we are doing
focuses in on government targets as well.
So employment, education, truancy crime, um,
health vaccinations.
So there's no reason why we couldn't fund whanau order
across multiple appropriations being moved into
that one apparatus so
that whanau can actually receive
those wau centered services.
Can I ask something supplementary on there?
Well, you have your job. Um, I know that a lot of people,
they talk to me, um, uh, in public that they watch the, the,
um, the select committee hearing.
So if you don't mind, can you just maybe give us a, a,
a brief run through when we talk about au um,
what does it look like to the average Joe Blow?
Because I know that we are in this, in this space,
but can you just give us a brief rundown of
what it looks like and, um,
and how TPK connects to that?
Sure. Mahi on the ground,
I might do a comparison between what we'd consider
to be sort of top down individual services,
and those are the services that a number of, uh,
the New Zealand public receive, which is, you know, you need
to a health service, you go
and engage with a health provider,
or you need to enroll your child in a school,
or you need to, um, have a, get a passport
or whatever it might be.
And you are very, we, uh,
because of our, the nature of our trust in government
and by virtue of education, um, uh,
socioeconomic backgrounds
and so on, usually very confident in navigating
all of those government services.
Yeah, we know where to go
and how to do what we need to get done,
but we know that there are segments of the community that
for lots of reasons, don't have that trust, um,
and that don't, um, feel comfortable engaging
with government services
because of sometimes intergenerational experiences
of under, uh, delivery by government.
And I think it's important to also recognize
that when we talk about government,
we we're not just talking about, you know, ministers,
politicians, public service.
So we're talking about our other agencies here,
MSD Health Education, talking about, uh, public service
who servants who by all intents
and purposes are trying to do a good job,
but actually are working in a top down way
where they are engaging with the public as individuals.
Whanau order takes a very different approach.
So as I said before, it puts the wau voice at the center.
What is the whanau wanting to achieve?
And so whanau order is based on a navigator model.
And a navigator model is a person that the whanau trusts.
Sometimes they may be connected to the whanau,
sometimes they're a person that the WAU has reached out to,
to say, we need your help.
And that person can work
with the whanau in a holistic way across a multiple range
of complex and overlapping needs.
And so that navigator may be saying, well,
and as George talked about earlier with the example,
it's not just one thing,
it's all the ways in which things overlap
and the multiplier effect.
And so the Han Order Navigator doesn't just come in
and say, there's a truancy issue here.
You know, we need to get the kids to school,
or We need to get these two year olds vaccinated,
or we need to help, um, mum find a job,
or we need to whatever, whatever the w the navigator says,
what do you want whanau?
What is it that you need? And so that person then helps
to connect whanau with the appropriate services so that
that whanau doesn't have to go
and try to navigate a series of services
that they don't trust sometimes don't believe in,
and sometimes don't even know how to access.
Yes. Um, thank you. Yeah.
Is that, is that navigator employed at the level of Papu
iwi, or is it, um, in a, in a, in a wider region?
Uh, so we have service providers who employ navigators,
and some of those service providers are very small,
and they may just have a dozen navigators,
and some of them are, are larger,
particularly in urban centers.
Um, and the employer
of those navigators varies right across the country.
So some of them will be iwi based employers
and some of them might be social service providers.
There's all sorts.
Is there in your vision, um, um,
um, um, a either either a move to,
or a desire to move towards more hapu based
delivery in, in, in terms of further devolution
of whanau order as it grows?
I mean, I appreciate you can only divide 170 million up
so much, but if, you know, add a couple of zeros to that,
could you divide it up a lot more?
Our, our vision is to devolve this to the community
because is a devolution model,
but not to determine from Wellington who that's devolve to.
So it's not for us to say, hapu should be doing this,
or Iwi should be doing this,
or it should be actually, the community needs to identify
who is best placed to do that.
It's a natural evolution.
I think that Hapu and Iwi would be involved in the space.
And if you think about the last 30 years post, uh,
the initial settlements that has been about consolidation of
economic resource Mm-Hmm.
But then to do what you didn't understand that
didn't ask you a question, but then to do what with that,
and that question has been asked, you know,
out in the community.
And it makes sense that, particularly
right now when we are seeing, uh, quite a lot
of money being spent inefficiently
and ineffectively on that 15%,
and, um, a high percentage of that would be Maori mm-Hmm.
That the, those in the community, hapu
and iwi in this particular case would look to where is,
where are their constituents and they are mm-Hmm.
If you think about iwi leaders, you know, where, where,
where do they, where they, they, um,
get their authority from and it's from the, um,
and they're driven to serve in that direction.
And it's just a natural evolution The other side to this,
and, you know, and I don't want to overplay this,
but it, it, it, they can probably do it better.
And it, um, then the public service,
because of the individual focus and the trust, um,
or the lack of trust that many in the community, um,
don't have in, in, um, the public service.
But then it's also quite lucrative.
I mean, they probably do it now for love. Mm-Hmm.
Thank you. Um, we come now to Shannon Halbert. Thank you.
He, he partai, um, uh, committed
to the treaty principles
and the delivery of Copa Maori initiatives.
Um, the treaty, all of the treaty principles. Yeah.
Yeah. Right.
And in the current environment, um, how will you ensure
that your government partners that you work with in other
organizations uphold the treaty
and its principles in its current form?
Um, well,
we are the principal policy advisor on government, um,
to the government on Maori wellbeing and development.
In addition to that, we will get the role from
that will make us the principal advisor on
Maori crown relationships as well.
The fundamental element of that will be, um, the treaty.
And so, um, part of that is monitoring settlements,
um, monitoring those other government departments.
So it's, it's additional to section five
as it currently stands.
Right. Um, to,
to those additional functions from TA fatigue, the
Policy and the policy leadership role that we have, which,
and Dave talked about this earlier, where we, uh, in terms
of our policy leadership, it is the embedding of
which is our policy, um, framework
and the basis of, um,
there's a couple of things to note about.
It's a positive reading of the treaty as it stands.
It's also based on the articles of the treaty
and looks to, um, distinguish between, uh,
citizenship rights as they are within the context of RP two,
as well as those rights, those existing rights that, um, uh,
that eno have, um, under, under article, uh, two.
So the, um, so the idea
and the idea of is to be able to bring, um,
that the basis of that is, is on those two things,
but it is also to be able to bring some discipline
to the way that policy development happens in quite
an organized way.
'cause part of the issue to date
that we see is the conflation
of those identities which are afforded to Maori.
Cause quite a bit of confusion.
Uh, it means that you, you know,
you're not clear policy makers are not clear about problem
is that they're trying to identify,
but also the opportunity that exists.
And so is presents a way of being able
to organize the thinking, the analysis, um, and
therefore then the advice, um, base, uh, on that basis.
And with that, um, we have spoken about, um,
since, you know, the first time we met you
as a specific committee Mm-Hmm.
I think it behooves us to actually brief you on this. Yeah.
Um, Mr. Chair, uh,
it some stage in the, you know, in the future.
'cause this is quite a fundamental framework, um,
and approach that we use.
Right. And so are you confident
therefore, that in our current state, nothing that Tiffany,
Ty, or your partners
are doing policy-wise is in breach of te
um, just
understanding others who, um, are responsible for
identifying breaches, I think
that's probably better opposed to them.
Um, we give free
and frank advice whether that advice, advice is taken
or not is a different matter before.
Is any of your advice, advice that you've been given
highlighting a breach of TE to your, that we have given, um,
well, we are on the record of giving advice
that is, that is open.
Mm-Hmm.
Um, now we go to Benjamin Doyle,
That's a
Benjamin Doyle.
Um, just in relation to the proposed treaty principles bill,
I'd like to understand if there's been any work done in
preparation for the possibility of that bill
and what the implications of it might be for
uni if it is implemented,
Um, in terms of if there is any work being done
that would be led by justice
or not aware of any work being done, um,
other than what is before them right now.
I just mean in regards to as a organization,
has UNI undertaken any work to prepare for
that possibility?
No. Um, supplementary. Mm-Hmm.
Hilda, um, I just want to understand then also, um,
what you might, uh, believe the implications of
that proposed legislation would be on tei.
That would be speculation.
I mean, it's, it's not currently government policy.
I haven't been instructed to prepare to do
anything different than I'm doing now.
My act remains, that guides me.
The cabinet papers guide me.
Um, Dave, I'm really keen to understand, um,
a few weeks ago we had you in with Treasury
and the Public Service Commission, um, really keen
to get your thoughts on that meeting.
Uh, and as it pertains to the role of, um, collaborating
with other agencies and the elevation
or the intent to elevate TPK to kind of
a more central agency
or a more influential agency,
I'm just wondering if you can give us some observations on
that meeting that we had, um, opportunities for TPK,
um, opportunities for the agencies there.
Yeah, just keen to get your thoughts on that
Discussion. I,
I thought it was a really positive meeting.
I mean, um, the treasury
and the public service are, are significant
agencies in terms of the system.
And so, um, having an opportunity to appear before them
and talk about the whole across the system is, is positive
for, I think it was positive for them as well.
So that's the first point.
Secondly, I think it was a real opportunity to,
to articulate the alignment between, um,
the devolution, um, and localism social investment
and the aspirations of Maori with the delivery approach
that we have developed around whanau centered,
locally government enabled at the time.
Um, I think I shared with you,
my view is this is the first time I've seen a nexus
at political level from the left
and the right in recent history by Maori
for Maori localism devolution, that, that
as a public servant responsible for stewarding long-term
outcomes for Maori, this provides an opportunity
where there is that nexus that aligns
with Maori thinking as well.
And I, I think the window for that is quite short. Mm-Hmm.
Um, I, I think we're talking about a number of years
to be able to bring that, um,
nexus to a positive conclusion, which
I think will be around the expansion of whanau centered,
locally led government enabled on the back of Wau water
and into social investment.
So that was an opportunity to have an earring
with the central agencies, two of the central agencies
for them to, to see themselves in that as well.
That's the opportunity.
Yeah. Thank you, Dave. We've
gotta supplement you if I'm reading,
Reading That.
So, um, I don't know if you've noticed a lot
of my questions kind of go to a very basic level.
So when we are talking and, and we,
and this is the, the main copa, um, you know, outcomes
for Maori, I'm just thinking, reflecting on
how do you foresee, um, again, kind
of how are we going to measure, not really measure,
but who's going to, who will, who will be, like,
who will guard the guard type thing?
Who's gonna check up on these outcomes?
Because from now to like, let's just say the 2040
goal, um, but also we're talking about the short term.
I know that you assess
and you, you, you monitor the progress,
but, um, is part of the plan to say, look, um, you know,
one year or one
and a half years, two years from now to this agency, we
were hoping to see this outcome, um, what's going on?
And is that part of the plan for TPK
That is part of the monitoring agency's plans, including,
uh, the treasury and including the public
services as they spoke about?
Um, I'll, I'll be honest, I, and,
and it's as well,
I don't think there's gonna be any surprises there.
In what way? In the trend, the trend that has been
around for over 40 years in terms of Maori development
and outcomes for Maori,
but on the back of what I've just said
around the opportunity, social investment
centered van water, there can, there's a real opportunity
to demonstrate another way of doing business
that I think at a system level could change
the outcomes for Maori.
And it will be through the community.
It is that 15%, that $35 billion.
Now, that's a lot of effort.
That is, and, and as Grace said, if you, um,
if you measured what whanau order uses in that regard,
it's 0.25%.
But imagine if you just moved it to 0.6%,
there's an opportunity, 'cause
that would require redistribution.
I think the key is looking
beyond the public service for these outcomes to occur.
We, we as a public, as a public service, deliver quite well
to 85% of the population.
And then when you think about how we arrange ourselves,
we arrange ourselves around the majority of what works.
So we'll continue to do that lockdown individually focused.
But what if we got that 15% right?
And that's where I think there would be a,
a game change for Maori.
So what if we got that system to change
and think about, think differently, how we would spend
that last 35 billion
or even 0.6% of that 35 billion.
So, so going back to, um,
something we touched upon earlier when it comes to maybe,
perhaps, um, it would be great
with your indulgence, Mr.
Chair, um, if we can see maybe, uh, a kind of, um,
brief report on the, on the history of, of
what outcomes have, um, what outcomes can we point to
since the inception of TPK, um,
some major, major milestones and learnings from that.
Um, because I think what we've come to realize,
and in my short time here is that you've, you've got, um,
you've got like these pockets of really deep data,
um, at your hands.
And I know that when we were talking about the housing,
you were saying that you've used that data to create a kind
of change in the system, systematic approach.
Um, can the data in the other pockets also, um, be used in
that strategic way so that, you know, we can have more of a,
um, you know, hopefully a better, better, um, outcomes
in the next things instead of nothing much changed here.
'cause what I'm understanding is you do have,
you have collected a lot of data
Over the years.
Yeah, I think there's, I think that would be correct.
Um, if I just again Yeah, yeah.
Highlight safe space. What, what I think, um,
it will tell us is that the public service does not deliver
to all Maori, and it hasn't for decades.
And there are reasons for that.
Part of that is trust and confidence.
The community have little trust.
We saw that very clearly in Covid.
And we've seen that in terms of being able
to identify solutions where power
as in UA can be used to build on when it doesn't involve
the public service because there's trust.
So what this,
where this has taken us to,
and I just point to the last five years, you know,
and I said this at the beginning, what we have learned,
the public service cannot deliver to all Maori,
but there are other actors that can, I,
I don't think whatever we do, we are going
to be able to, um, rectify
that in any meaningful way, way,
just through the public service.
We have to think of the system as broader
beyond the public service.
But we can provide you with data.
Um, it will show that, um, it won't show the solution
'cause we haven't built it yet.
But it will show you those small pockets of examples like tu
you know, and just to highlight that, again, 800 whanau,
341 of them were at risk of being referred to Orang Tam.
Of those 341 80, were on the cusp of,
of going into care with either one
or more children going into care
that's at $50,000 a year per child.
And if there was one child per those 80 whanau,
that's $4 million saving in one year.
And that's, a pro has done a lot of these,
but now what's the conclusion?
And the conclusion is we need
to scale up those wau centered locally government
enabled programs.
And the best vehicle for
that at a system level is social investment right now.
And the best vehicle at a delivery level,
whanau centered locally led is whanau water.
And I'm banking on that. Mm-Hmm.
Thank you. Thanks, Dave. More questions? Sorry,
I just wanna Stop on supplementary. Hannah Raffa.
Yes. Thank you Mr. Chen.
Um, I don't actually know if this is a question
or statement, but I wanted to, um, kind of
elaborate more on your statement that you said
around outcomes for Maori is not TP K's responsibility.
And I strongly agree with that.
Um, and I think
I just wanna understand your,
what your guys coping mechanisms are.
Well, me Maori lens is all about collectivism,
and that's our pros and cons
because then we end up with everything as well.
Then the system lens is all about individualism,
and it's like our whanau, uh, I guess have to go
to these ministries individually.
Whereas TPK is the whole package.
Um, what's your coping mechanisms to bridge those gaps
between collectivism and individualism in a system?
Way? One, that's one parti
and then another parti is, um, how can we
as a select committee meet you guys halfway?
Is that you coming to brief us on,
or what some things that we could, I guess,
take the opportunity for
with the being the Maori affairs split committee?
Mm-Hmm. Um, understand we went into a deep dive report
that we wanted to do when Martina was still here
around whanau centered approaches.
Mm-Hmm. Um, and just really getting the committee
to understand what works and what doesn't and how it works.
Um, so yeah. Two questions.
What are those coping mechanisms between the two
and what would you propose to us?
To me, halfway.
Okay. Um, in terms of the individual individualism
and the collective, which is, you know, we've had a lot
of conversation about that.
Um, the key to this is proof
because our system
and the MON majority within the system
and our public service system has us,
is focused on an individual.
That's just the way it works.
But for the last, um, 10 plus years,
we have had an alternative solution,
which is Mm.
And that's about the collective,
the primary unit within Maori society beings of au So we've,
there's, there's been an acceptance of that and,
but whenever I've tried to argue that point,
and you've heard me talk about the, the, the metrics here
around two, but that's just the prototype.
Mm-Hmm. And so it doesn't actually take us anywhere,
but the key is proof.
And you know, Dan, I know I've, you know,
rabbited on about this
and we've replay, replayed it back to me around attribution,
and it's getting the attribution right.
So it, it's being able to get w to level three attribution
because even though no one else can prove
level three attribution Mm-Hmm.
We always get questioned on it because it's not the norm.
Yeah. Collective delivery is not the norm.
It's a, it's a different concept.
So the way to get this done is to prove it.
And that's what Grace is doing right now in terms of the RFP
and then getting people lined up to the, the, um, standards,
the guidelines of social investment and the IDI
and putting it into the spine of the IDI.
Because regardless that comes out, that's proof.
Now when that, when that is proven,
and I have no doubt it will be, then we can go into,
okay, can anyone else prove it?
Can anyone else prove something at level three?
And I want Maori, um, liberty mechanisms
to be at the front of the queue.
'cause we can prove it. That's
what I'm positioning this for.
Okay. Our coping mechanisms, to your point, I think is
for us having a really clear strategy, our vision,
our purpose, and clarity of role.
And, um, you hear that Dave, you know, if you,
if you catch yourself in an elevator with Dave,
he will be asking you, you know, what's our, what's our, uh,
vision purpose involved?
And that, um, in terms of, uh, keeping us, um, true to
what it is that we are here to do.
That I think that is a, um, a mechanism
that really helps us.
Um, and then you and what are you good at?
Like, what is to pin good at? What is Maori about Ari?
And, um, that's why the whanau centered approaches leading
out with the strong mentoring, um, and monitoring.
Those are the ways that we give expression
to our role and our purpose.
And I, you know, in terms of, um, yourselves as a,
as a committee, there'll be, there'll be something
that only you will bring to, um, to, to, to the environment.
And that's what we try to hold on to is what is it only
one place in the world where there are some particular
things that we get to do, um, that brings our unique role
and purpose to the fore.
And, um, I think that's a coping measure, a strategy
that we use and use all the time.
Mm-Hmm.
Questions more time? We got a lot more time.
So, um, I'm, when, when Maria, I'd love to move to
speaking about, um, Maori, the revitalization there.
That's quite a big shift from,
From, uh, where we're at.
We're at future thinking.
Um, well, no, it is, it is future thinking.
I'm just saying it's from it's shift
from, from the, from this.
Okay. Hold there thought there's plenty of time.
Um, so we're talking about the future.
Um, I think TPK does these long-term insights briefings.
Um, there was some really good thinking in the last one you
guys have done, um, particularly around the, the kind
of shifts that need to happen.
But what, how do you operationalize that
or bring that down to what does it mean
for TPK now next year?
Um, you know, is, is it just a document that you produce
for parliament, then it just goes into a draw,
you pull it out again when you
come back to a select committee.
Um, but how do we, how do we give effect to
the long term view in a, in a more actionable, um,
operational sense?
Well, I think the, the key message out of the long term
insights briefing, and there's the three scenarios in there.
Yeah. If we continue what we are doing,
the outcomes will get worse.
Mm. So, you know, really the, the key there is we cannot
keep doing what we are doing,
which is why we're looking at system change.
And that that is the purpose of long term insights briefing
and what it would require in each one of those
domains in order to shift the dial.
Um, that is the point of it.
And in the future, I mean, what do you see
as TP K's role in that?
Is it like a center of excellence there?
Where is, um, you got every other ministry
and agency who's massive budgets and accountability,
but what is TP K's role in, in helping
that systemic change other than, you know,
I think locally led au center, that's clear, you know,
return on investment, social return investment.
But how do you get that change when, you know,
we had two major organizations here that, to be frank,
weren't really anywhere near the level of change we expect.
Um, so what's TPAs TP K's role gonna be to help
treasury, public Service Commission, MOE housing
make those transitions?
If you, um, if you look at the, the, um,
the legislation and the levers we've got, um,
and if you apply that strictly, it would be
to monitor everybody to within an inch of their life.
Um, but I'm not sure what that would achieve.
So it's, it's just trying to get to, to get people
to take the solutions that are on offer.
That's part of the influence, you know, in the work
that we are doing, you know, we meet our other colleagues,
meet their boards
and talk to them about what could happen,
what the future could look like in the process that we,
we've just discussed around front water.
That's exactly what has happened.
Now I have engaged with, um, community leaders.
I have engaged with the auditor general.
I have engaged with the head of the so well about
to engage today with the head
of the social investment agency, the board, um, and others.
So it's just being able to position that, right.
We do have a stick, but we've gotta give a solution as well.
Yeah. I think, if I
Could add, Dave, our efforts
of the last few years have been focused on other agencies
and trying to convince other agencies of
whanau centered approaches
and whanau URA as an example of that.
In reality, we have had limited traction with that approach.
And one of the, uh, opportunities I think now, particularly
with social investment as an agency,
but also with a, um, an agency
that has a minister who's also minister for Finance
and Minister for Public Services, is
that there's an opportunity at, for the influence
to not just be across agencies, but at a ministerial level.
'cause what we are seeing is that other agencies,
when we are engaging on whanau set approaches is there is a
small coalition of the willing who, uh,
are already signed up.
But to actually get system change, we'll need to have, um,
some bigger leaders will need to be in there.
And there was a question earlier about do
we have the right levers?
There are a limited number of levers we have,
but there are a number of levers that ministers have.
And I think those are the levers that potentially are going
to need to be used in order
to really bring about the change we need in our communities.
Mm-Hmm. And those levers are probably financial. Yes.
Thank you, grace. Uh,
we've got a supplementary from David and Powell.
I can't argue with anything you say Grace,
but I keep on thinking as to why we've struggled
to gain the traction to move forward.
And I can't help but keep on returning back
to risk management, risk mitigation, uh,
devolution of power.
Uh, I look at the way in which we contract, uh,
central government Mm-Hmm.
Um, obligations, uh, service delivery, et cetera.
And it all comes attached
to a document bigger than my volume here today.
Um, so I'm, I'm, I'm really trying to pick out through here,
uh, what is, uh, re reframed us from being able
to actually progress and get that traction and move forward.
'cause if we get to understand that, then we can start
to reposition the court to try
and get the outcome that we're seeking type thing.
So in my opinion, it's risk.
Do you, you guys have an, an opinion
of why this isn't able to gain the traction?
I think partly risk. I think there is, um, an inherent
part of this, which is that the public service feels,
it knows best ego, ego that there is, um,
some inherent knowledge that by virtue
of being in the public service, we know how to do it.
There's also, um, control that, um,
and I've, you know, I've seen colleagues use the Public
Finance Act and other things to say, look, we need
to control this and have the reporting and whatnot.
Um, and really giving up control
and handing it back to the community, um,
is counterintuitive for most public servants.
There has to be some other elements to this
as well in human nature.
If I think about my staff behind me
and the, you know, the 400 odd staff I've got around the tu,
they come to work to make a difference.
They come to work to deliver.
I think my staff are missional, um, probably more
so than most, but I would say that.
But, and across the public service, you have staff that come
to deliver and they don't want,
they don't want to give that up.
So it's quite hard to convince.
My staff had said to me when I said, we're going
to hand over the community, but Dave, that's what we do.
Oh, no. We're going to hand over to.
So there's all of these things, um, that, you know,
including the accountability arrangements,
which are quite strict for, um, for people to be permissive.
One of the, uh, things I've, I struggle with the,
our system is, uh, is how we deal with, uh,
I call it learning, start with failure.
So when things actually don't go well,
we come down hard on everybody rather than actually taking
that as a learning, getting the positive out of it and,
and changing their direction and that Mm-Hmm.
And unfortunately, um, it's not really a question back.
We, we, we're, we're, we're our only worst enemy, uh,
by the way in which we treat, um, entrepreneurialism, um,
endeavor to deliver a great outcome in itself.
Because with that sometimes comes with a mistake
or a learning or a failure, whatever you want to put,
put the term to it type thing.
And, um, i it their appetite for people
that are ultimately accountable
and in this place here, it's executive, uh, for them to,
or what appetite they they have
for the learnings for the failure.
And the fact that you can actually make some progress,
I think is actually part of our problem
of the way in which we manage this
placement of the government.
That statement, I haven't made a question,
It does impact upon us.
I mean, operates in a very exposed space
with very high expectations,
and there's a lot of reasons for that.
Mm-Hmm. Um,
and when you want to try something different,
and that's what we are doing, you are more exposed.
Mm-Hmm. And there are high expectations.
So to go back to Hannah's point, I was to ask anything
of the committee that would be, to understand that, uh,
we could be, we could quite happily go into a safe space
and sit over there and write reports and we would be safe.
Mm-Hmm. But our staff are missional
and we are trying to do something,
and that takes us into an exposed space.
Yeah. And just on the positive, um, I've, I've,
I've heard very good feedback, um, particularly locally,
my community, around the way that people
and businesses engage with TPK more so than other agencies.
So, uh, feed that back to your team,
I think there is some really good, um, missional
Purpose there from your team.
Great. Um, please
On that point, so we can understand, um, some
of the psychology behind it.
When you say there's, um, expectation, um,
and you said, and there's reasons for that, what,
what reasons come to your mind?
Well, we, we are a, a subset of the wider
community Mm-Hmm.
Wider New Zealand and the issues that, um, are
high on the agenda across New Zealand.
And so that situation reflects back on
organizations, Maori organizations like mine.
Thank you. Okay.
Um, Greg, do you wanna go to your Oh, oh, sorry.
No, I was just gesturing so that you knew
that email was Okay. Thank you,
Greg. Today,
Maori. Hey. Yeah.
So, uh, it says here on page 28,
uh, that in, um, PP 2024, um,
you had the gathering, um,
to look at, uh, what comes next, uh, in terms
of mahi Corona.
So it's about eight months on what's, um,
where are we at now with that?
With The, Or six months on?
Sorry.
With the mahi Corona
With, yeah. With the work that
was gonna come out of that.
Um, yeah, in terms of, in terms
and including the, um, how is it
that TPK is gonna be working, um, with this?
'cause this is, this is one of your goals
that's really obviously overlaps
with a couple other agencies. Mm-Hmm.
So a couple of things.
So Maori was reviewed in 2022, um,
and what the review found was it
was broadly fit for purpose.
Um, what we are doing at the moment is undertaking some
minor and technical changes through the, um, what is, uh,
hopefully proposed through a Maori purposes bill.
Um, uh, that will, um, do some simple things like,
well simple, but there's still needed a lot of work to do.
So it's making the, the legislation,
but for purpose in terms of, um, so some examples of it is,
um, enabling teta, why the co-chair person relationship, uh,
and, uh, arrangements for that to be reflected in,
in the legislation, um, for teta y to be able
to add additional iwi, um, uh, which weren't, uh,
they were in existence,
but they weren't reflected in the legislation
when it was introduced.
Um, and to, uh, what's the other one?
To, um, be able to align the languages of the act in a, um,
so that they, uh, can give full expression
to the act is there to do.
So that work is underway.
Uh, in terms of, uh, um,
and then following on from that,
there are sub more substantive, um,
there is some more substantive policy work, um,
that the Minister for Maori development has initiated,
particularly with the Maori language entity entity.
We call them the Maori language entity, so Maori, Maori,
and along with te.
Um, and that is to really look at, within te uh,
really look at how, um, the, I guess the sector
or the investment that government makes
through those entities in te Maori, how that can be, um,
more efficient and more effective, um, in service of the,
um, te Maori has three audacious goals,
and the one and two of them are progressing quite well.
Um, but the one that's sort of falling
behind a little bit is around, um,
and that's the ability for Maori to speak Maori.
And so, um, he has asked us to undertake work, um,
su uh, supported, uh,
by the Maori language entities in, in that regard.
So how do you both make the sector work more efficiently
and effectively, but in service of the, the goals of t Um,
what will also, in a practical way, what has happened in,
in relation to that is we, there's been a stop take for, uh,
across each of the entities, um, around outcomes
for Del Maori.
Um, we've also got the substantive evaluation
of Mahi Corona, um, that will be finished, uh, shortly.
Um, and obviously the review of TU itself helps
to input into that.
And then we've got the census data from 2023
that is becoming available too.
So the idea is to bring all of that together, um,
and supported by the minister's direction
and working with Wai, um, to be able to figure out, okay, so
what are the outstanding policy matters that have to be con,
have to be progressed? Right.
So at the two, thank you very much, what are the two, two,
um, measures that are going well?
Uh, so the two measures that are going well are, um, uh,
a, so 85%, so the audacious goal is 85%
of New Zealanders or more will value Tial Maori
as a key part of national identity.
Um, and so the progress towards that is the goal is 85.
Um, the metric that we have at the moment is 74%
of New Zealanders considered Tial Maori
to be a key part of our national identity.
Yeah. So that's the first one.
MAGA is the second audacious goal.
So 1 million New Zealanders or more will have the ability
and confidence to talk at least in basic te Maori.
Um, so the last metric we have is, uh,
900,000 New Zealanders.
Consider they can speak about basic things in, um,
which is an awesome increase from 770,000 in 2016.
And then the one as I mentioned is,
which is the last audacious goal.
Um, and the target there is 150,000 Maori age 15
and over, we'll use Maori as much as English.
And at the moment, the,
That's by 2040, is it?
That's by 2014? Yeah.
At the moment, the metric for that is 72,000 Maori are using
Maori as much as they use English.
So that's half of that goal. So
In, on page 71, when you, um, you say 51%
of, of your Kai Mahi at TPK are proficient in TA Maori, is
that proficiency measure similar to what we have in mind
for a million New Zealanders by 2040?
Or is that a higher level?
We're over here.
Sorry, what was your question?
So, um, on page 71 of the report, we, um, TPK says
that 51% of its current workforce are proficient
in al Maori.
We're just interrogating what we mean by proficient
and whether that is the same level that we are seeking
for a million New Zealanders to have by 2040,
The proficiency could, I don't know how this, um, the data
that's sitting behind this 51%,
but it could be related to, um, the amount of allowances.
So as our, um, well could be a couple of things.
It could be self-identification
that our staff have been surveyed
and 51% of them think that they are proficient in te Maori.
We also have, um, allowances for, which is based on the, uh,
proficiency tests that are offered by Tito.
And so it could be related to, um, 51% of
our, uh, it could be related to that test.
Right. That is, that is done. Does any,
Um, sorry, um, just, just to add to Paula's point, um,
our, our focus in our Maori strategy is, um, um,
80% of our com.
He speak mostly Del Maori every day in the workplace.
So that's that kind of measure.
Okay. So that's your aim at TPK, you'd like 80%
to have most of their, most
of their interactions being al Maori.
Correct. So, but that wouldn't, you wouldn't be suggesting
that 51% of your staff are at that level currently?
Uh, no. I, I guess there's a,
there's an attestation level, so
that's the proficient first.
Um, but what we would encourage is that in,
in the conversational, so starting off with finishing with,
um, uh, uh, greetings, et cetera throughout the workplace,
we would encourage that 80% level
to be mostly conversational,
but the 51% is multipli to the at station level through the,
the level final to, to run.
So that would be level three to, to 30? Correct.
So level three to, to is proficient.
Uh, proficient. Okay. And so,
and would that be fair to say that then the,
the long term goal that we have by 2040
of a million New Zealanders, so we'd be anticipating that by
that stage close to 20%
of the population would be at a level three?
Is that, that's what we mean by that million
Shaking.
Oh, Nadia. Oh, Nadia,
Sorry, Jasmine.
Push shaking
Is the, the, I'm just, just trying to understand what,
what it is that rain for in 2040.
So when we say we won a million New Zealanders to be
of a certain level, who's trying to get a,
a handle on what that level is?
Yeah, so so is it level three of it's,
No, it's a little bit lower than that.
So it's, um, we use a proxy measure on the
general social survey.
So that's the, um, basic speaker.
So they have basic conversational skills.
Um, the actual measure in the mahi is the ability
and confidence to be able to use City Maori,
but we, um, the best proxy measure is the one
that we use in general social survey.
So that's slightly lower than the census, um,
measure, which is more conversational.
Um, and the toto, the level finder examination, um,
the level three is moderate proficiency, which is
around conversational, um, level to,
So sort of level four, maybe level five,
Uh, in terms of the level finder examination for Tito,
level four would be high proficiency
and level five would be complete proficiency.
Um, but in the general social survey you're looking at
found level two, right? Well, yeah.
So, so just, just so I'm, um, there, so, um, in, in a,
uh, for example, something like level five is essentially
where you, where you begin,
it's ideal if you've got some level of drill
before you start, but, so level by the end of one year
of level five, you're able, they would say
that you have conversational proficiency
and then you, from there you go up to six, seven.
I think seven is the, is the highest.
I think level, level seven is essentially the, I mean,
that's the end of your, of your degree level.
So is that, am I,
are we talking about the same scale there? No,
No, not the same.
So what's the scale that you
are speaking to and what's the,
Uh, so for the, my head Corona,
we use general social survey
and that's so self reported probably level two basic, um,
based basic ability
to speak basic Maori for the census.
Um, the measure there is around conversational skills
and that would've played
to about a level three in the general social survey.
Um, and then the other one I was talking about was their
to is level binder examination,
which many public servants take.
Right. Um, and they have a scale of one to five
with level three being moderate proficiency
and level five being complete proficiency.
And so in terms of the 51%
of TP K's workforce at the moment,
would they be at level three?
Uh, yes. 'cause that's, yeah, that's very, it's similar.
Yeah, it's conversational.
Okay. So in the scale that you're talking about,
the top level is level six.
Level six would be Otto or,
Uh, is five level five is top five isto. Okay.
That's really helpful. Sorry, I've taken a lot
of, can I ask one more question?
Yeah. Um, so on page 58, uh,
percentage of total population, this is the, um,
the first measure under re Maori
of re Maori order.
Oh, ta. Um, yeah, who am I, uh, percentage
of total population with the ability
to speak more than a few words, phrases in Maori,
which I presume this would be level one,
then in terms of what we were just talking about,
Uh, that could be level two, but we can come back on that.
Okay. Alright.
So this is where I'm, um, this is where I just, I find it,
uh, I would find it.
Is it, is it possible for us to get some more detail about
what, about what these different, what we mean
by these different measures and phrases?
Just so we can get some consistency of
what it is that we're aiming for?
I would find a lot easier to be able to be able
to measure our progress in the coming years if I know
what it, what it is that we're actually aiming for.
Yeah. So we, we do an indicators report,
and so we will, um, report on, um,
and we use the same measures.
Um, we use a combination of measures, uh,
and the general social survey,
the one that's mentioned there.
Yeah. Uh, that one there, yeah, it will have
to confirm whether it's level one or level two. Okay. Yeah,
That'd be brilliant. And then, and
then my specific question is, is that correct
that it's dropped from 30 to 17?
I'm hoping not. Is it off the
General social survey, which
Yeah. Yeah, I read that
note 12,
but that's still, I mean, it just, it just at most,
that's saying that there's a 48, um,
or sorry, 24 month comparison there rather than a 12 month.
But either way is it, is it literally halved still?
What Page, page 58?
We'd have to come back to you. Yeah.
Just work on converting all your local
constituency, Greg, and
Get us there. Yeah,
I mean, the reason behind, the reason why, why,
while this is just, is that, um, I, you know, I do,
I do think that the, um, that the flourishing
of Tara Maori is, is arguably, um, well,
it's right up there in terms of a hard to think
of another measure that's any more important than, um,
and, uh, um, um, and,
and it would, it would, it would seem to me that, um,
that we, we need to put, uh, more time attention
and probably resources into that.
But in order for us to do that, we need to be really,
really clear on what we're measuring at the moment.
It doesn't seem like that is the case.
So that would be probably much challenge out of this
Conversation. Fine.
Good. Good. Um, any other questions, members?
Okay. Look, uh, we might be able to give you some time back,
so, but Dave, do you wanna walk us
through some pretty big changes in TPK in the next year?
Do you wanna walk us through some timelines, at least
what you can tell us around, um, the transfer
of the functions, um, the next steps for the, the,
the strategy refresh specific timelines, um,
that you are able to give us,
because you'll be seeing us again,
I guess in this time next year, uh,
or estimates, I guess so halfway through next year,
and it'd be great to have a sense of what will,
what things will be changed, uh,
between now and then. Okay.
I'll, um, shortly hand over to Steven.
He's the, um, the point of contact between us
and Tara Fiti because,
because of the transfer involved in both, both agencies.
So Steve,
Dave, and, uh, thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Um, as the committee,
we are aware on the 12th of August cabinet decided, um,
or approved a transfer of functions, um, from
TI to, to Bunnie.
Ty, uh, Dave earlier in the session
outlined the five functions that will transfer
and those that will remain with chat.
So I don't propose to rehearse those again
unless it's useful for the committee.
Um, the fundamental, uh, date
to which we are working is Monday 24,
February, 2025.
That is the date on which, uh,
the five functions transferring will move from Toyota 52 to,
um, and in a, in a deeply practical sense,
I just want to give the committee a sense.
One example would be, uh, the third of those functions
that's coordinating significant events
on behalf of the Crown.
So in practical terms, uh, that means TGI day, uh,
in 2025, uh, falls under responsibility of Tata.
52 weeks later, uh, those functions transfer two
to pu So TGI DE 2026 sits with Pui Corti,
just to give a sense of that.
Um, as part of that, there will be, uh,
44 full-time equivalents.
I'm not saying 44 people,
but 44 FTE transferring from
52 to bully Corty.
Uh, and with those 44 FTEs come the funding
for those positions and, uh, the organizational overhead
with that, so they also move on the
24th of February, 2025.
Um, I wouldn't want to preempt anything too much just yet as
to where the 44 FTE will, as we might say,
land within 20, uh,
because that's a topic that's still undergoing consultation.
Uh, actually, sorry, I take that back consultation on
that end at, um, the end of last week.
Uh, but decisions that compilation of that feedback, um,
and then the decisions that flow from that have,
have yet to occur.
Um, and, um, Dave
and the interim chief executive of, uh,
will make decisions on that in the coming week, uh,
with an aim of 12 December.
Um, so that's next week, yeah, 12 December
for announcements at both organizations as to
what the future structure looks like itself.
Um, so that's the transfer of functions in our,
in our process sense.
And I'll, I'll press pause there, um, just to get, get sense
as to whether that was the answer
you were seeking. Good. Perfect.
Any questions on that team? No, that's great.
Thank you, Steven. And, um,
and how about for the strategy refresh
and the four year kind of, uh, goals and aspirations?
How do, what are the timelines
and, uh, things that we should expect to see between now
and estimates next year?
So the strategic contentions, um,
will be available from June, 2025.
Um, we have started that work.
Um, we expect that, um, trying to think of
what more detail I can give.
Um, we expect to have, um, the change that we expect
to see in, in that strategic contentions will be, um,
primarily the, the work coming over from tei.
That would be the biggest shift
and res scoping what
that looks like within our strategic contentions.
Um, but we do believe that our, our vision,
um, remains the same.
Um, our role with the inclusion of chat, um,
will be slightly different.
Um, and we're currently looking at what our
priority areas will be, um, aligned with, um,
this government's focus as well.
And so, um, we spoke about that at length
will will be, um, on, at one of our priorities,
economic development, um, monitoring,
and then we'll also have a T focus, um, IL primarily
because we are the only agency who can lead out on
that mahi, um, as you pointing Greg.
So yeah. Um, we, we are due for it to be, um,
released in June, 2025.
The actual, actual strategy itself. You'll see it.
And I think on page five, um, the, the next iteration of
that we should have, um, before the strategic contentions.
Yes. I think, you know, going back on my opening statements
around what we've learned, there's probably two, two key
approaches here that we will need to think about
how we inject into the strategy.
One is the delivery approach, you know, what that is.
And then the policy approach that we have yet
to brief you on, which is to, to heal normal.
And those are system changes. Mm-Hmm.
Um, the priorities would have to be, um, aligned with, um,
where the minister and the government want to go.
Uh, but Ena has given you a glimpse of where we think,
you know, in anticipation where that may take us.
Wonderful. All right.
Well, um, thank you very much Nami to you all
and thank you to you and your team for
What you do. Yeah.
If, if we're about to wrap up, there is just one just,
um, I'd like to ask you don't mind.
Um, I, I, I'm really appreciate
'cause um, think many of us here, um,
feel very strongly about social investment
and I realize that throughout many of the answers, not all,
but many, there was a reference to social investment.
Um, so can I ask you, do, when you,
um, when the government was formed
and a Minister for social investment was, um, was,
was put into place, do you feel that will help a lot with,
um, with where you'd like us to go?
Um, or you'd like as in, um, whanau to go with respect
to having that social investment approach, um,
having the first minister for social investment.
Um, I'm wondering, did you see that as a positive thing
and can you see that going forward that can really help
with implementing those social investment type of, um,
uh, uh, that type of copper that we want to
really in, um, implants into the way we do things?
I thought I saw that as an opportunity
to accelerate the adoption of, uh,
putting wau at the center
and delivering that through social investment.
So I, I, I see that as an opportunity
and it's that nexus between what is localism, devolution,
what is Maori aspiration,
and what both the left
and the right have talked about coming together
for a stewarding opportunity
to deliver on outcomes Maori need and deserve.
There's a real opportunity here for the public service. Mm.
So it doesn't change every time.
Every time we have a new, um,
government, there's an opportunity. Mm-Hmm.
Great. Thank you. Thank you Dave.
And thank you to you and your team
and, uh, have a great Christmas break
and all the best for the changes next year.
Thank you.